Sunday , 14 June , 1942 

On Friday, June 12th, I woke up at six o'clock and no 
wonder; it was my birthday. But of course I was not allowed 
to get up at that hour, so I had to control my curiosity until 
a quarter to seven. Then I could bear it no longer, and went 
to the dining room, where I received a warm welcome from 
Moortje (the cat). 

Soon after seven I went to Mummy and Daddy and then 
to the sitting room to undo my presents. The first to greet me 
was you , possibly the nicest of all. Then on the table there 
were a bunch of roses, a plant, and some peonies, and more 
arrived during the day. 

I got masses of things from Mummy and Daddy, and was 
thoroughly spoiled by various friends. Among other things I 
was given Camera Obscura , a party game, lots of sweets, 
chocolates, a puzzle, a brooch, Tales and Legends of the 
Netherlands by Joseph Cohen, Daisy’s Mountain Holiday (a 
terrific book), and some money. Now I can buy The Myths 
of Greece and Rome— grand! 

Then Lies called for me and we went to school. During 
recess I treated everyone to sweet biscuits, and then we had 
to go back to our lessons. 

Now I must stop. Bye-bye, we're going to be great pals.

Monday , 15 June, 1942 

I had my birthday party on Sunday afternoon. We showed 
a film The Lighthouse Keeper with Rin-Tin-Tin, which my 
school friends thoroughly enjoyed. We had a lovely time. 
There were lots of girls and boys. Mummy always wants to
know whom Im going to marry. Little does she guess that 
it’s Peter Wessel; one day I managed, without blushing or 
flickering an eyelid, to get that idea right out of her mind. 
For years Lies Goosens and Sanne Houtman have been my 
best friends. Since then, I’ve got to know Jopie de Waal at the 
Jewish Secondary School. We are together a lot and she is 
now my best girl friend. Lies is more friendly with another 
girl, and Sanne goes to a different school, where she has made 
new friends. 

Saturday, 20 June, 1942 

I haven’t written for a few days, because I wanted first of 
all to think about my diary. It’s an odd idea for someone like 
me to keep a diary; not only because I have never done so 
before, but because it seems to me that neither I-nor for 
that matter anyone else— will be interested in the unbosomings
of a thirteen-year-old schoolgirl. Still, what does that matter? I want to write, but more than that, I want to bring out 
all kinds of things that lie buried deep in my heart. 

There is a saying that ‘paper is more patient than man”; 
it came back to me on one of my slightly melancholy days, 
while I sat chin in hand, feeling too bored and limp even to 
make up my mind whether to go out or stay at home. Yes, 
there is no doubt that paper is patient and as I don’t intend 
to show this cardboard-covered notebook, bearing the proud 
name of “diary,” to anyone, unless I find a real friend, boy or 
girl, probably nobody cares. And now I come to the root of 
the matter, the reason for my starting a diary: it is that I have 
no such real friend. 

Let me put it more clearly, since no one will believe that a 
girl of thirteen feels herself quite alone in the world, nor is it 
sq. I have darling parents and a sister of sixteen. I know about 
thirty people whom one might call friends-I have strings of 
boy friends, anxious to catch a glimpse of me and who, failing 
that, peep at me through mirrors in class. I have relations, 
aunts and uncles, who are darlings too, a good home, no— I 
don’t seem to lack anything. But it’s the same with all my 
friends, just fun and joking, nothing more. I can never bring 
myself to talk of anything outside the common round. We 
don’t seem to be able to get any closer, that is the root of the 
trouble. Perhaps I lack confidence, but anyway, there it is, a 
stubborn fact and I don’t seem to be able to do anything 
about it. 

Hence, this diary. In order to enhance in my mind’s eye the 
picture of the friend for whom I have waited so long, I don’t 
want to set down a series of bald facts in a diary like most 
people do, but I want this diary itself to be my friend, and I 
shall call my friend Kitty. No one will grasp what I’m talking 
about if I begin my letters to Kitty just out of the blue, so 
albeit unwillingly, I will start by sketching in brief the story 
of my life. 

My father was thirty-six when he married my mother, who 
was then twenty-five. My sister Margot was born in 1926 in 
Frankfort-on-Main, I followed on June 12, 1929, and, as we 
are Jewish, we emigrated to Holland in 1933, where my father 
was appointed Managing Director of Travies N.V. This firm 
is in close relationship with the firm of Kolen & Co. in the 
same building, of which my father is a partner. 

The rest of our family, however, felt the full impact of 
Hitler’s anti-Jewish laws, so life was filled with anxiety. In 
1938 after the pogroms, my two uncles (my mothers 
brothers) escaped to the U.S.A. My old grandmother came 
to us, she was then seventy-three. After May 1940 good times 
rapidly fled: first the war, then the capitulation, followed by 
the arrival of the Germans, which is when the sufferings of us 
Jews really began. Anti-Jewish decrees followed each other in 
quick succession. Jews must wear a yellow star, 1 Jews must 
hand in their bicycles, Jews are banned from trains and are 
forbidden to drive. Jews are only allowed to do their shopping 
between three and five o’clock and then only in shops which 
bear the placard “Jewish shop.” Jews must be indoors by eight 
o’clock and cannot even sit in their own gardens after that 
to distinguish them from others, all Jews were forced by the Germans to 
wear, prominently displayed, a yellow six-pointed star. 

hour. Jews are forbidden to visit theaters, cinemas, and other 
places of entertainment. Jews may not take part in public 
sports. Swimming baths, tennis courts, hockey fields, and 
other sports grounds are all prohibited to them. Jews may not 
visit Christians. Jews must go to Jewish schools, and many 
more restrictions of a similar kind. 

So we could not do this and were forbidden to do that. But 
life went on in spite of it all. Jopie used to say to me, "You’re 
scared to do anything, because it may be forbidden." Our 
freedom was strictly limited. Yet things were still bearable. 

Granny died in January 1942; no one will ever know how 
much she is present in my thoughts and how much I love her 
still. 

In 1934 I went to school at the Montessori Kindergarten 
and continued there. It was at the end of the school year, I 
was in form 6B, when I had to say good-by to Mrs. K. We 
both wept, it was very sad. In 1941 I went, with my sister 
Margot, to the Jewish Secondary School, she into the fourth 
form and I into the first. 

So far everything is all right with the four of us and here I 
come to the present day. 

Saturday , 20 June , 1942 

Dear Kitty, 

I’ll start straight away. It is so peaceful at the moment, 
Mummy and Daddy are .out and Margot has gone to play 
ping-pong with some friends. 

I’ve been playing ping-pong a lot myself lately, We pingpongers are very partial to an ice cream, especially in summer, 
when one gets warm at the game, so we usually finish up with 
a visit to the nearest ice-cream shop, Delphi or Oasis, where 
Jews are allowed. We’ve given up scrounging for extra pocket 
money. Oasis is usually full and among our large circle of 
friends we always manage to find some kindhearted gentleman or boy friend, who presents us with more ice cream than 
we could devour m a week. 

I expect you will be rather surprised at the fact that I 
should talk of boy friends at my age. Alas, one simply cant 
seem to avoid it at our school As soon as a boy asks if he may 
bicycle home with me and we get into conversation, nine out 
of ten times I can be sure that he will fall head over heels in 
love immediately and simply won t allow me out of his sight. 
After a while it cools down of course, especially as I take little 
notice of ardent looks and pedal blithely on. 

If it gets so far that they begin about “asking Father” I 
swerve slightly on my bicycle, my satchel falls, the young man 
is bound to get off and hand it to me, by which time I have 
introduced a new topic of conversation. 

These are the most innocent types; you get some who blow 
kisses or try to get hold of your arm, but then they are definitely
knocking at the wrong door. I get off my bicycle and 
refuse to go further m their company, or I pretend to be insulted
and tell them in no uncertain terms to clear off. 

There, the foundation of our friendship is laid, till tomorrow.

Yours, Anne 

Sunday, 21 June, 1942 

Dear Kitty, 

Our whole class B1 is trembling, the reason is that the 
teachers’ meeting is to be held soon. There is much speculation
 as to who will move up and who will stay put. Miep de 
Jong and I are highly amused at Wim and Jacques, the two 
boys behind us. They won t have a florin left for the holidays, 
it will all be gone on betting. “You’ll move up,” “Shan’t,” 
“Shall,” from morning till night. Even Miep pleads for silence 
and my angry outbursts don’t calm them. 

According to me, a quarter of the class should stay where 
they are; there are some absolute cuckoos, but teachers are 
the greatest freaks on earth, so perhaps they will he freakish 
in the right way for once. 

I’m not afraid about my girl friends and myself, we’ll 
squeeze through somehow, though fro not too certain about 
my math. Still we can but wait patiently. Till then, we cheer 
each other along. 

I get along quite well with all my teachers, nine in all, 
seven masters and two mistresses. Mr. Keptor, the old math 
master, was very annoyed with me for a long time because I 
chatter so much. So I had to write a composition with “A Chatterbox”
as the subject. A chatterbox! Whatever could one 
write? However, deciding I would puzzle that out later, I 
wrote it in my notebook, and tried to keep quiet. 

That evening, when Td finished my other homework, my 
eyes fell on the title in my notebook. I pondered, while chewing the end of my fountain pen, that anyone can scribble some 
nonsense in large letters with the words well spaced but the 
difficulty was to prove beyond doubt the necessity of talking. 
I thought and thought and then, suddenly having an idea, 
filled my three allotted sides and felt completely satisfied. My 
arguments were that talking is a feminine characteristic and 
that I would do my best to keep it under control, but I should 
never be cured, for my mother talked as much as I, probably 
more, and what can one do about inherited qualities? Mr. 
Keptor had to laugh at my arguments, but when I continued 
to hold forth in the next lesson, another composition followed. 
This time it was ‘Incurable Chatterbox,” I handed this in and 
Keptor made no complaints for two whole lessons. But in the 
third lesson it was too much for him again. “Anne, as punishment
 for talking, will do a composition entitled ‘Quack, quack, 
quack, says Mrs. Natterbeak.’ ” Shouts of laughter from the 
class. I had to laugh too, although I felt that my inventiveness 
on this subject was exhausted. I had to think of something 
else, something entirely original. I was in luck, as my friend 
Sanne writes good poetry and offered to help by doing the 
whole composition in verse. I jumped for joy. Keptor wanted 
to make a fool of me with this absurd theme, I would get my 
own back and make him the laughing-stock of the whole class 
The poem was finished and was perfect. It was about a mother 
duck and a father swan who had three baby ducklings. The 
baby ducklings were bitten to death by Father because they 
chattered too much. Luckily Keptor saw the joke, he read the 
poem out loud to the class, with comments, and also to various other classes. 

Since then I am allowed to talk, never get extra work, in 
fact Keptor always jokes about it. 

Yours, Anne 

Wednesday , 24 June, 1942 

Dear Kitty, 

It is boiling hot, we are all positively melting, and in this 
heat I have to walk everywhere. Now I can fully appreciate 
how nice a tram is; but that is a forbidden luxury for Jews— 
shank’s mare is good enough for us. I had to visit the dentist 
in the Jan Luykenstraat in the lunch hour yesterday. It is a 
long way from our school in the Stadstimmertuinen; I nearly 
fell asleep in school that afternoon. Luckily, the dentist’s
assistant was very kind and gave me a drink— she’s a good sort. 

We are allowed on the ferry and that is about all. There is 
a little boat from the Josef Israelskade, the man there took us 
at once when we asked him. It is not the Dutch people's fault 
that we are having such a miserable time. 

I do wish I didn’t have to go to school, as my bicycle was 
stolen in the Easter holidays and Daddy has given Mummy’s 
to a Christian family for safekeeping. But thank goodness, the 
holidays are nearly here, one more week and the agony is over. 
Something amusing happened yesterday, I was passing the 
bicycle sheds when someone called out to me. I looked around 
and there was the nice-looking boy I met on the previous evening,
at my girl friend Eva’s home. He came shyly towards me 
and introduced himself as Harry Goldberg. I was rather surprised
and wondered what he wanted, but I didn’t have to 
wait long. He asked if I would allow him to accompany me 
to school. “As you’re going my way in any case, I will,” I replied
and so we went together. Harry is sixteen and can tell 
all kinds of amusing stones. He was waiting for me again this 
morning and I expect he will from now on. 

Yours, Anne 

Tuesday , SO June, 1942 

Dear Kitty, 

Ive not had a moment to write to you until today. I was 
with friends all day on Thursday. On Friday we had visitors, 
and so it went on until today. Harry and I have got to know 
each other well in a week, and he has told me a lot about his 
life; he came to Holland alone, and is living with his grand* 
parents. His parents are in Belgium. 

Harry had a girl friend called Fanny. I know her too, a very 
soft, dull creature. Now that he has met me, he realized that 
he was just daydreaming in Fanny's presence. I seem to act 
as a stimulant to keep him awake. You see we all have our 
uses, and queer ones too at times! 

Jopie slept here on Saturday night, but she went to Lies on 
Sunday and I was bored stiff. Harry was to have come in the 
evening, but he rang up at 6 p.m. I went to the telephone, he 
said, “Harry Goldberg here, please may I speak to Anne?” 
“Yes, Harry, Anne speaking.” 

“Hullo, Anne, how are you?” 

“Very well, thank you.” 

Tm terribly sorry I can’t come this evening, but I would 
like to just speak to you; is it all right if I come in ten minutes?” 

“Yes, that’s fine, good-by!” 

“Good-by, 111 be with you soon.” 

Receiver down. 

I quickly changed into another frock and smartened up my 
hair a bit. Then I stood nervously at the window watching for 
him. At last I saw him coming. It was a wonder I didn’t dash 
down at once; instead I waited patiently until he rang. Then I 
went down and he positively burst in when I opened the door. 
“Anne, my grandmother thinks you are too young to go out 
regularly with me, and that I should go to the Leurs, but
perhaps you know that I am not going out with Fanny any morel" 

“No, why is that, have you quarreled?" 

“No, not at all. I told Fanny that we didn't get on well together, so it was better for us not to go out together any more, 
but she was always welcome in our home, and I hope I should 
be in hers. You see, I thought Fanny had been going out with 
another boy and treated her accordingly. Rut that was quite 
untrue. And now my uncle says I should apologize to Fanny, 
but of course I didn't want to do that so I finished the whole 
affair. That was just one of the many reasons. My grandmother 
would rather I went with Fanny than you, but I shan't; old 
people have such terribly old-fashioned ideas at times, but I 
just can't fall into line. I need my grandparents, but in a sense 
they need me too. From now on I shall be free on Wednesday 
evenings. Officially I go to wood-carving lessons to please my 
grandparents, in actual fact I go to a meeting of the Zionist 
Movement. I’m not supposed to, because my grandparents are 
very much against the Zionists. I’m by no means a fanatic, but 
I have a leaning that way and find it interesting. But lately it 
has become such a mess there that I'm going to quit, so next 
Wednesday will be my last time. Then I shall be able to see 
you on Wednesday evenings, Saturday afternoon, Sunday
afternoon, and perhaps more." 

“But your grandparents are against it, you can’t do it behind their backs!” 

“Love finds a way.” 

Then we passed the bookshop on the comer, and there 
stood Peter Wessel with two other boys; he said “Hello"— it's 
the first time he has spoken to me for ages, I was really 
pleased. 

Harry and I walked on and on and the end of it all was that 
I should meet him at five minutes to seven m the front of his 
house next evening. 

Yours, Anne 

Friday , S July , 1942 

Dear Kitty, 

Harry visited us yesterday to meet my parents, I had bought 
a cream cake, sweets, tea, and fancy biscuits, quite a spread, 
but neither Harry nor I felt like sitting stiffly side by side
indefinitely, so we went for a walk, and it was already ten past 
eight when he brought me home. Daddy was very cross, and 
thought it was very wrong of me because it is dangerous for 
Jews to be out after eight o’clock, and I had to promise to be 
in by ten to eight in future. 

Tomorrow I’ve been invited to his house. My girl friend 
Jopie teases me the whole time about Harry. I’m honestly not 
in love, oh, no, I can surely have boy friends—no one thinks 
anything of that— but one boy friend, or beau, as Mother calls 
him, seems to be quite different. 

Harry went to see Eva one evening and she told me that 
she asked him, “Who do you like best, Fanny or Anne?” He 
said, “It’s nothing to do with you!” But when he left (they 
hadn’t chatted together any more the whole evening), “Now 
listen, it’s Anne, so long, and don’t tell a soul.” And like a 
flash he was gone. 

It’s easy to see that Harry is in love with me, rather fun for 
a change. Margot would say, “Harry is a decent lad.” I agree, 
but he is more than that. Mummy is full of praise* a goodlooking boy, a well-behaved, nice boy. I’m glad that the whole 
family approve of him. He likes them too, but he thinks my 
girl friends are very childish, and he’s quite right. 

Yours, Anne 

Sunday morning, 5 July, 1942 

Dear Kitty, 

Our examination results were announced in the Jewish 
Theater last Friday. I couldn’t have hoped for better.
My report is not at all bad, I had one weeks satis, a five for algebra, 
two sixes, and the rest were all sevens or eights. They were 
certainly pleased at home, although over the question of 
marks my parents are quite different from most They don't 
care a bit whether my reports are good or bad as long as Im 
well and happy, and not too cheeky: then the rest will come 
by itself. I am just the opposite. I don’t want to be a bad 
pupil; I should really have stayed in the seventh form in the 
Montessori School, but was accepted for the Jewish
Secondary. When all the Jewish children had to go to Jewish schools, 
the headmaster took Lies and me conditionally after a bit of 
persuasion. He relied on us to do our best and I don’t want 
to let him down. My sister Margot has her report too, brilliant 
as usual. She would move up with cum laude if that existed 
at school, she is so brainy. Daddy has been at home a lot 
lately, as there is nothing for him to do at business; it must 
be rotten to feel so superfluous. Mr. Koophuis has taken over 
Travies and Mr. Kraier the firm Kolen & Co. When w© 
walked across our little square together a few days ago, 
Daddy began to talk of us going into hiding. I asked him why 
on earth he was beginning to talk of that already. “Yes, 
Anne,” he said, ‘you know that we have been taking food, 
clothes, furniture to other people for more than a year now. 
We don’t want our belongings to be seized by the Germans, 
but we certainly don’t want to fall into their clutches ourselves. So we shall disappear of our own accord and not wait 
until they come and fetch us.” 

“But, Daddy, when would it be?” He spoke so seriously 
that I grew very anxious. 

“Don’t you worry about it, we shall arrange everything. 
Make the most of your carefree young life while you can.” 
That was all. Oh, may the fulfillment of these somber words 
remain far distant yet! 

Yours, Anne 

Wednesday, 8 July, 1942 

Dear Kitty, 

Years seem to have passed between Sunday and now. So 
much has happened, it is just as if the whole world had 
turned upside down. But I am still alive, Kitty, and that is the 
main thing, Daddy says. 

Yes, I'm still alive, indeed, but don't ask where or how. 
You wouldn't understand a word, so I will begin by telling 
you what happened on Sunday afternoon. 

At three o'clock (Harry had just gone, but was coming 
back later) someone rang the front doorbell. I was lying lazily 
reading a book on the veranda in the sunshine, so I didn't 
hear it. A bit later, Margot appeared at the kitchen door
looking very excited. “The S.S. have sent a call-up notice for 
Daddy,” she whispered. “Mummy has gone to see Mr. Van 
Daan already.” (Van Daan is a friend who works with Daddy 
in the business.) It was a great shock to me, a call-up; every 
one knows what that means. I picture concentration camps 
and lonely cells-should we allow him to be doomed to this? 
“Of course he won't go,” declared Margot, while we waited 
together. “Mummy has gone to the Van Daans to discuss 
whether we should move into our hiding place tomorrow. 
The Van Daans are going with us, so we shall be seven in all.” 
Silence. We couldn’t talk any more, thinking about Daddy, 
who, little knowing what was going on, was visiting some old 
people in the Joodse Invalide; waiting for Mummy, the heat 
and suspense, all made us very overawed and silent. 

Suddenly the bell rang again. “That is Harry,” I said. 
“Don't open the door.” Margot held me back, but it was not 
necessary as we heard Mummy and Mr. Van Daan downstairs, talking to Harry, then they came in and closed the door 
behind them. Each time the bell went, Margot or I had to 
creep softly down to see if it was Daddy, not opening the door 
to anyone else. 

Margot and I were sent out of the room. Van Daan wanted 
to talk to Mummy alone. When we were alone together in 
our bedroom, Margot told me that the call-up was not for 
Daddy, but for her. I was more frightened than ever and
began to cry. Margot is sixteen; would they really take girls of 
that age away alone? But thank goodness she won't go, 
Mummy said so herself, that must be what Daddy meant 
when he talked about us going into hiding. 

Into hiding-where would we go, in a town or the country, 
in a house or a cottage, when, how, where . . .? 

These were questions I was not allowed to ask, but I 
couldn’t get them out of my mind. Margot and I began to 
pack some of our most vital belongings into a school satchel. 
The first thing I put in was this diary, then hair curlers,
handkerchiefs, schoolbooks, a comb, old letters; I put in the 
craziest things with the idea that we were going into hiding. 
But I’m not sorry, memories mean more to me than dresses. 

At five o’clock Daddy finally arrived, and we phoned Mr. 
Koophuis to ask if he could come around in the evening. Van 
Daan went and fetched Miep, Miep has been in the business 
with Daddy since 1933 and has become a close friends,
likewise her brand-new husband, Henk. Miep came and took 
some shoes, dresses, coats, underwear, and stockings away in 
her bag, promising to return in the evening. Then silence fell 
on the house; not one of us felt like eating anything, it was 
still hot and everything was very strange. We let our large upstairs room to a certain Mr. Goudsmit, a divorced man in his 
thirties, who appeared to have nothing to do -on this
particular evening; we simply could not get rid of him without being 
rude; he hung about until ten o’clock. At eleven o’clock Miep 
and Henk Van Santen arrived. Once again, shoes, stockings, 
books, and underclothes disappeared mto Miep’s bag and 
Henk’s deep pockets, and at eleven-thirty they too
disappeared. I was dog-tired and although I knew that it would he 
my last night in my own bed, I fell asleep immediately and 
didn’t wake up until Mummy called me at five-thirty the next 
morning. Luckily it was not so hot as Sunday; warm ram fell 
steadily all day. We put on heaps of clothes as if we were going to the North Pole, the sole reason being to take clothes 
with us. No Jew in our situation would have dreamed of going out with a suitcase full of clothing. I had on two vests, 
three pairs of pants, a dress, on top of that a skirt, jacket, 
summer coat, two pairs of stockings, lace-up shoes, woolly 
cap, scarf, and still more; I was nearly stifled before we 
started, but no one inquired about that. 

Margot filled ber satchel with schoolbooks, fetched her 
bicycle, and rode off behind Miep into the unknown, as far 
as I was concerned. You see I still didn't know where our 
secret hiding place was to be. At seven-thirty the door closed 
behind us. Moortje, my little cat, was the only creature to 
whom I said farewell. She would have a good home with the 
neighbors. This was all written in a letter addressed to Mr. 
Goudsmit. 

There was one pound of meat in the kitchen for the cat, 
breakfast things lying on the table, stripped beds, all giving 
the impression that we had left helter-skelter. But we didn't 
care about impressions, we only wanted to get away, only 
escape and arrive safely, nothing else. Continued tomorrow. 

Yours, Anne 

Thursday , 9 July , 1942 

Dear Kitty, 

So we walked in the pouring rain, Daddy, Mummy, and 
I, each with a school satchel and shopping bag filled to the 
brim with all kinds of things thrown together anyhow. 

We got sympathetic looks from people on their way to 
work. You could see by their faces how sorry they were they 
couldn’t offer us a lift; the gaudy yellow star spoke for itself. 

Only when we were on the road did Mummy and Daddy 
begin to tell me bits and pieces about the plan. For months 
as many of our goods and chattels and necessities of life as 
possible had been sent away and they were sufficiently ready 
for us to have gone into hiding of our own accord on July 16. 
The plan had had to be speeded up ten days because of the 
call-up, so our quarters would not be so well organized, but 
we had to make the best of it. The hiding place itself would 
be in the building where Daddy has his office. It will be hard 
for outsiders to understand, but I shall explain that later on. 
Daddy didn’t have many people working for him. Mr. Kraler, 
Koophuis, Miep, and E1H Vossen, a twenty-three-year-old 
typist who all knew of our arrival. Mr. Vossen, Ellfs father, 
and two boys worked in the warehouse; they had not been 
told. 

I will describe the building: there is a large warehouse on 
the ground floor which is used as a store. The front door to 
the house is next to the warehouse door, and inside the front 
door is a second doorway which leads to a staircase (a). 
There is another door at the top of the stairs, with a frosted 
glass window in it, which has “Office” written in black letters 
across it. That is the large main office, very big, very light, and 
very full. Elli, Miep, and Mr. Koophuis work there in the daytime. A small dark room containing the safe, a wardrobe, and 
a large cupboard leads to a small somewhat dark second office. 
Mr. Kraler and Mr. Van Daan used to sit here, now it is only 
Mr. Kraler. One can reach Kraler s office from the passage, 
but only via a glass door which can be opened from the inside, 
but not easily from the outside. 

From Kraler’s office a long passage goes past the coal store, 
up four steps and leads to the showroom of the whole building: the private office. Dark, dignified furniture, linoleum 
and carpets on the floor, radio, smart lamp, everything firstclass. Next door there is a roomy kitchen with a hot-water 
faucet and a gas stove. Next door the W.C. That is the first 
floor. 

A wooden staircase leads from the downstairs passage to 
the next floor (b). There is a small landing at the top. There 
is a door at each end of the landing, the left one leading to a 
storeroom at the front of the house and to the attics. One of 
those really steep Dutch staircases runs from the side to the 
other door opening on to the street (c). 

The right-hand door leads to our “Secret Annexe.” No one 
would ever guess that there would be so many rooms hidden 
behind that plain gray door. There s a little step in front of 
the door and then you are inside. 

There is a steep staircase immediately opposite the entrance (e). On the left a tiny passage brings you into a room 
which was to become the Frank family's bed-sitting-room, 
next door a smaller room, study and bedroom for the two 
young ladles of the f amil y. On the right a little room without 
windows containing the washbasin and a small W.C.
compartment, with another door leading to Margot’s and my 
room. If you go up the next flight of stairs and open the door, 
you are simply amazed that there could be such a big light 
room in such an old house by the canal. There is a gas stove 
in this room (thanks to the fact that it was used as a laboratory)
and a sink. This is now the kitchen for the Van Daan 
couple, besides being general living room, dining room, and 
scullery. 

A tiny little corridor room will become Peter Van Daan s 
apartment. Then, just as on the lower landing, there is a 
large attic. So there you are, I’ve introduced you to the whole 
of our beautiful "Secret Annexe." 

Yours, Anne 

Friday , 10 July, 1942 

Dear Kitty, 

I expect I have thoroughly bored you with my long-winded 
descriptions of our dwelling. Rut still I think you should 
know where we’ve landed. 

Rut to continue my story— you see, I’ve not finished yet 
-when we arrived at the Prinsengracht, Miep took us quickly 
upstairs and into the "Secret Annexe.” She closed the door 
behind us and we were alone. Margot was already waiting 
for us, having come much faster on her bicycle. Our living 
room and all the other rooms were chock-full of rubbish, 
indescribably so. All the cardboard boxes which had been 
sent to the office in the previous months lay piled on the 
floor and the beds. The little room was filled to the ceiling 
with bedclothes. We had to start clearing up immediately, 
if we wished to sleep in decent beds that night. Mummy 
and Margot were not in a fit state to take part; they were 
tired and lay down on their beds, they were miserable, and 
lots more besides. Rut the two “clearers-up” of the family— 
Daddy and myself— wanted to start at once. 

The whole day long we unpacked boxes, filled cupboards, 
hammered and tidied, until we were dead beat. We sank into 
clean beds that night. We hadn’t had a bit of anything warm 
the whole day, but we didn’t care; Mummy and Margot were 
too tired and keyed up to eat, and Daddy and I were too 
busy. 

On Tuesday morning we went on where we left off the 
day before. Elli and Miep collected our rations for ns, Daddy 
improved the poor blackout, we scrubbed the kitchen floor, 
and were on the go the whole day long again. I hardly had 
time to think about the great change in my life until
Wednesday. Then I had a chance, for the first time since our 
arrival, to tell you all about it, and at the same time to realize 
myself what had actually happened to me and what was still 
going to happen. 

Yours, Anne 

Saturday , 11 July , 1942 

Dear Kitty, 

Daddy, Mummy, and Margot cant get used to the sound 
of the Westertoren clock yet, which tells us the time every 
quarter of an hour. I can. I loved it from the start, and 
especially in the night it's like a faithful friend. I expect 
you will be interested to hear what it feels like to "disappear"; 
well, all I can say is that I don’t know myself yet. I don’t 
think I shall ever feel really at home in this house, but 
that does not mean that I loathe it here, it is more like 
being on vacation in a very peculiar boardinghouse. Rather 
a mad idea, perhaps, but that is how it strikes me. The 
“Secret Annexe” is an ideal hiding place. Although it leans 
to one side and is damp, you’d never find such a comfortable 
hiding place anywhere in Amsterdam, no, perhaps not even 
in the whole of Holland. Our little room looked very bare 
at first with nothing on the walls; but thanks to Daddy 
who had brought my film-star collection and picture
postcards on beforehand, and with the aid of paste pot and 
brush, I have transformed the walls into one gigantic
picture. This makes it look much more cheerful, and, when 
the Van Daans come, we’ll get some wood from the attic, 
and make a few little cupboards for the walls and other odds 
and ends to make it look more lively. 

Margot and Mummy are a little bit better now. Mummy 
felt well enough to cook some soup for the first time 
yesterday, but then forgot all about it, while she was downstairs 
talking, so the peas were burned to a cinder and utterly 
refused to leave the pan. Mr. Koophuis has brought me a 
book called Young People’s Annual. The four of us went 
to the private office yesterday evening and turned on the 
radio. I was so terribly frightened that someone might hear 
it that I simply begged Daddy to come upstairs with me. 
Mummy understood how I felt and came too. We are very 
nervous in other ways, too, that the neighbors might hear 
us or see something going on. We made curtains straight 
away on the first day. Really one can hardly call them
curtains, they are just light, loose strips of material, all different 
shapes, quality, and pattern, which Daddy and I sewed together in a most unprofessional way. These works of art 
are fixed in position with drawing pins, not to come down 
until we emerge from here. 

There are some large business premises on the right of 
us, and on the left a furniture workshop; there is no one 
there after working hours but even so, sounds could travel 
through the walls. We have forbidden Margot to cough at 
night, although she has a bad cold, and make her swallow 
large doses of codeine. I am looking for Tuesday when the 
Van Daans arrive; it will be much more fun and not so quiet. 
It is the silence that frightens me so in the evenings and at 
night. I wish like anything that one of our protectors could 
sleep here at night. I can't tell you how oppressive it is 
never to be able to go outdoors, also Im very afraid that we 
shall be discovered and be shot. That is not exactly a pleasant 
prospect. We have to whisper and tread lightly during the 
day, otherwise the people in the warehouse might hear us. 

Someone is calling me. 

Yours, Anne 

Friday , 14 August , 1942 

Dear Kitty, 

I have deserted you for a whole month, but honestly, 
there is so little news here that I can’t find amusing things 
to tell you every day. The Van Daans arrived on July 13. We 
thought they were coming on the fourteenth, but between 
the thirteenth and sixteenth of July the Germans called up 
people right and left which created more and more unrest, 
so they played for safety, better a day too early than a day 
too late. At nine-thirty in the morning (we were still having 
breakfast) Peter arrived, the Van Daans’ son, not sixteen 
yet, a rather soft, shy, gawky youth; can’t expect much from 
his company. He brought his cat (Mouschi) with him. Mr. 
and Mrs. Van Daan arrived half an hour later, and to our 
great amusement she had a large pottie in her hat box. “I 
don’t feel at home anywhere without my chamber,” she 
declared, so it was the first thing to find its permanent
resting place under her divan. Mr. Van Daan did not bring his, 
but carried a folding tea table under his arm. 

From the day they arrived we all had meals cozily together 
and after three days it was just as if we were one large 
family. Naturally the Van Daans were able to tell us a lot 
about the extra week they had spent in the inhabited world. 
Among other things we were very interested to hear what 
had happened to our house and to Mr. Goudsmit. Mr. Van 
Daan told us: 

“Mr. Goudsmit phoned at nine o’clock on Monday morning and asked if I could come around. I went immediately 
and found G. in a state of great agitation. He let me read a 
letter that the Franks had left behind and wanted to take 
the cat to the neighbors as indicated in the letter, which 
pleased me. Mr. G. was afraid that the house would be 
searched so we went through all the rooms, tidied up a bit, 
and cleared away the breakfast things. Suddenly I discovered 
a writing pad on Mrs. Frank’s desk with an address in 
Maastricht written on it. Although I knew that this was 
done on purpose, I pretended to be very surprised and 
shocked and urged Mr. G. to tear up this unfortunate little 
piece of paper without delay. 

“I went on pretending that I knew nothing of your disappearance all the time, but after seeing the paper, I got a 
brain wave. ‘Mr. Goudsmit’—I said — it suddenly dawns on 
me what this address may refer to. Now it all comes back 
to me, a high-ranking officer was in the office about six 
months ago, he appeared to be very friendly with Mr. Frank 
and offered to help him, should the need arise. He was
stationed in Maastricht. I think he must have kept his word 
and somehow or other managed to get them into Belgium 
and then on to Switzerland. I should tell this to any friends 
who may inquire. Don’t, of course, mention Maastricht/ 

“With these words I left the house. Most of your friends 
know already, because I’ve been told myself several times 
by different people.” 

We were highly amused at the story and, when Mr. Van 
Daan gave us further details, laughed still more at the way 
people can let their imagination run away with them. One 
family had seen the pair of us pass on bicycles very early 
in the morning and another lady knew quite definitely that 
we were fetched by a military car in the middle of the night 

Yours, Anne 

Friday, 21 August , 1942 

Dear Kitty, 

The entrance to our hiding place has now been properly 
concealed. Mr. Kraler thought it would be better to put a 
cupboard in front of our door (because a lot of houses axe 
being searched for hidden bicycles), but of course it had to 
be a movable cupboard that can open like a door. 

Mr. Vossen made the whole thing. We had already let 
him into the secret and he can't do enough to help. If we 
want to go downstairs, we have to first bend down and then 
jump, because the step has gone. The first three days we 
were all going about with masses of lumps on our foreheads, 
because we all knocked ourselves against the low doorway. 
Now we have nailed a cloth filled with wood wool against 
the top of the door. Let’s see if that helps! 
I’m not working much at present; Im giving myself
holidays until September. Then Daddy is going to give me
lessons; it's shocking how much I’ve forgotten already. There 
is little change in our life here. Mr. Van Daan and I usually 
manage to upset each other, its just the opposite with 
Margot whom he likes very much. Mummy sometimes treats 
me just like a baby, which I can’t bear. Otherwise things are 
going better. I still don’t like Peter any more, he is so boring; 
he flops lazily on his bed half the time, does a bit of carpentry, and then goes back for another snooze. What a fool! 

It is lovely weather and in spite of everything we make 
the most we can of it by lying on a camp bed in the attic, 
where the sun shines through an open window. 

Yours, Anne 

Wednesday , 2 September , 1942 

Dear Kitty, 

Mr. and Mrs. Van Daan have had a terrific quarrel, I’ve 
never seen anything quite like it before. Mummy and Daddy 
would never dream of shouting at each other. The cause 
was so trivial that the whole thing was a pure waste of breath. 
But, still, everyone to his own liking. 

Naturally it is very unpleasant for Peter, who has to stand 
by. No one takes him seriously, he is so frightfully touchy 
and lazy. Yesterday he was badly upset because he found 
that his tongue was blue instead of red; this unusual
phenomenon of nature disappeared just as quickly as it had come. 
Today he is going about with a scarf on, as he has a stiff 
neck; in addition “M’lord” complains of lumbago. Pains 
around the heart, kidneys, and lungs are not unusual either, 
he is a real hypochondria (that’s the word for such people, 
isn’t it?)! It is not all honey between Mummy and Mrs. 
Van Daan; there is plenty of cause for unpleasantness. To 
give a small example, I will tell you that Mrs. Van Daan has 
taken all three of her sheets out of the common linen
cupboard. She takes it for granted that Mummy’s sheets will do 
for all of us. It will be a nasty surprise for her when she finds 
that Mummy has followed her good example. 

Also, she is thoroughly piqued that her dinner service 
and not ours is in use. She is always trying to find out where 
we have actually put our plates; they are closer than she 
thinks, they are in a cardboard box behind a lot of junk in 
the attic. Our plates are unget-at-able as long as we are 
here, and a good thing too. I always have bad luck; I smashed 
one of Mrs. Van Daan’s soup plates into a thousand pieces 
yesterday. “Oh!” she cried angrily. “Couldn't you be
careful for once— that's the last one I've got.” Mr. Van Daan 
is all sugar to me nowadays. Long may it last. Mummy gave 
me another frightful sermon this morning; I can't bear them. 
Our ideas are completely opposite. Daddy is a darling,
although he can sometimes be angry with me for five minutes 
on end. Last week we had a httle interruption in our
monotonous life; it was over a book about women-and Peter. 
First I must tell you that Margot and Peter are allowed to 
read nearly all the books that Mr. Koophuis lends us, but 
the grownups held back this particular book on the subject 
of women. Peter s curiosity was aroused at once. What was 
it the two of them were not allowed to read in this book? 
He got hold of the book on the sly, while his mother was 
downstairs talking, and disappeared with his booty to the 
attic. All went well for a few days. His mother knew what 
he was doing, but didn't tell tales, until Father found out. 
He was very angry, took the book away, and thought that 
that would finish the whole business. However, he had not 
allowed for his sons curiosity, which waxed rather than 
waned because of his father's attitude. Peter, determined to 
finish it, thought of a way to get hold of this enthralling 
book. In the meantime, Mrs. Van Daan had asked Mummy 
what she thought about it all. Mummy thought this
particular book was not suitable for Margot, but she saw no 
harm in letting her read most books. 

“There is a great difference, Mrs. Van Daan,” said 
Mummy, “between Margot and Peter. In the first place, 
Margot is a girl and girls are always more grownup than 
boys, secondly, Margot has read quite a lot of serious books, 
and does not go in search of things that are forbidden her, 
and thirdly, Margot is far more developed and intelligent, 
shown by the fact of her being in the fourth form at school.” 
Mrs, Van Daan agreed, but still thought it was wrong in 
principle to let children read books which were written for 
grownups. 

In the meantime Peter had found a time of the day when 
no one bothered about him or the book: seven-thirty in the 
evening— then everyone was in the private office listening 
to the radio. That was when he took his treasure to the 
attic, again. He should have been downstairs again by eightthirty, but because the book was so thrilling he forgot the 
time and was just coming downstairs as his father came into 
the room. You can imagine the consequences! With a slap 
and a snatch, the book lay on the table and Peter was in the 
attic. That’s how matters stood as we sat down to table. 
Peter stayed upstairs~no one bothered about him, and he 
had to go to bed without any supper. We went on with the 
meal, chattering gaily, when suddenly we heard a piercing 
whistle; we all stopped eating and looked with pale changed 
faces from one to another. Then we heard Peter’s voice,
calling down the chimney, “I say, I’m not coming down anyway.” 
Mr. Van Daan sprang to his feet, his napkin fell to the floor, 
and scarlet in the face he shouted, Tve had enough of 
this.” Daddy took his arm, afraid of what might happen, and 
the two men went together to the attic. After a good deal of 
resistance and stamping, Peter landed up in his room with 
the door closed and we went on eating. Mrs. Van Daan 
wanted to save one slice of bread for the dear boy, but his 
father stood firm. “If he doesn’t apologize soon, he will have 
to sleep in the attic.” Loud protests from the rest of us, as 
we thought missing supper was quite enough punishment. 
Besides, Peter might catch cold and we couldn’t call a doctor. 

Peter did not apologize; he was already in the attic. Mr. 
Van Daan did nothing more about it, but I noticed the next 
morning that Peter s bed had been slept in. Peter was back 
in the attic at seven o’clock, but Daddy managed with a 
few friendly words to persuade him to come down again. 
Sour faces and obstinate silences for three days and then 
everything went smoothly once more. 

Yours, Anne 

Monday , 21 September , 1942 

Dear Kitty, 

Today fm going to tell you our general news. 

Mrs. Van Daan is unbearable. I get nothing but "blowups” from her for my continuous chatter. She is always
pestering us in some way or other. This is the latest, she doesn't 
want to wash up the pans if there is a fragment left; instead 
of putting it into a glass dish, as we’ve always done until 
now, she leaves it in the pan to go bad. 

After the next meal Margot sometimes has about seven 
pans to wash up and then Madame says: "Well, well,
Margot, you have got a lot to do!” 

I’m busy with Daddy working out his family tree: as we 
go along he tells me little bits about everyone— it’s terribly 
interesting. Mr. Koophuis brings a few special books for me 
every other week. I’m thrilled with the Joop ter Heul series. 
I’ve enjoyed the whole of Cissy van Marxveldt very much. 
And I’ve read Een Zomerzotheid four times and I still laugh 
about some of the ludicrous situations that arise. 

Term time has begun again, I’m working hard at my 
French and manage to pump in five irregular verbs per day. 
Peter sighs and groans over his English. A few schoolbooks 
have just arrived; we have a good stock of exercise books, 
pencils, rubbers, and labels, as I brought these with me. I 
sometimes listen to the Dutch news from London, heard 
Prince Bernhard recently. He said that Princess Juliana is 
expecting a baby about next January. I think it is lovely; it 
surprises the others that I should be so keen on the Royal 
Family. 

I was being discussed and they decided that I’m not
completely stupid after all, which had the effect of making me 
work extra hard the next day. I certainly don’t want to 
still be in the first form when Im fourteen or fifteen. 

Also the fact that Im hardly allowed to read any decent 
books was mentioned. Mummy is reading Heeren, Vromoen 
en Knechten now, which Im not allowed (Margot is). First 
I must be more developed, like my talented sister. Then we 
talk about my ignorance of philosophy and psychology, about 
which I know nothing. Perhaps by next year I shall be 
wiser! (I looked up these difficult words quickly in Koenen.) 

I have just woken up to the disturbing fact that I have 
one long-sleeved dress and three cardigans for the winter. 
I’ve received permission from Daddy to knit a jumper of 
white sheep’s wool; it’s not very nice wool, but as long as it’s 
warm that’s all that matters. We have some clothes
deposited with friends, but unfortunately we shall not see them 
until after the war, that is if they are still there then. I had 
just written something about Mrs. Van Daan when in she 
came. Slap! I closed the book. “Hey, Anne, can’t I just have 
a look?” 

“I’m afraid not.” 

“Just the last page then?” 

“No, I’m sorry.” 

Naturally it gave me a frightful shock, because there was 
an unflattering description of her on this particular page. 

Yours, Anne 

Friday, 25 September, 1942 

Dear Kitty, 

Yesterday evening I went upstairs and “visited” the Van 
Daans. I do so occasionally to have a chat. Sometimes it 
can be quite fun. Then we have some moth biscuits (the 
biscuit tin is kept in the wardrobe which is full of
mothballs) and drink lemonade. We talked about Peter. I told 
them how Peter often strokes my cheek and that I wished 
he wouldn’t as I don’t like being pawed by boys. 

In a typical way parents have, they asked if I couldn’t get 
fond of Peter, because he certainly liked me very much. I 
thought “Oh dear!” and said: “Oh, no!” Imagine it! 

I did say that I thought Peter rather awkward, but that it 
was probably shyness, as many boys who haven't had much 
to do with girls are like that. 

I must say that the Refuge Committee of the “Secret 
Annexe” (male section) is very ingenious. Ill tell you what 
they've done now to get news of us through to Mr. Van 
Dijk, Travies’ chief representative and a friend who has
surreptitiously hidden some of our things for us! They typed 
a letter to a chemist in South Zeeland, who does business 
with our firm, in such a way that he has to send the enclosed 
reply back in an addressed envelope. Daddy addressed the 
envelope to the office. When this envelope arrives from 
Zeeland, the enclosed letter is taken out, and is replaced by 
a message in Daddy's handwriting as a sign of life. Like 
this, Van Dijk won't become suspicious when he reads the 
note. They specially chose Zeeland because it is so close to 
Belgium and the letter could have easily been smuggled over 
the border, in addition no one is allowed into Zeeland
without a special permit; so if they thought we were there, he 
couldn't try and look us up. 

Yours, Anne 

Sunday , 27 September , 1942 

Dear Kitty, 

Just had a big bust-up with Mummy for the umpteenth 
time; we simply don’t get on together these days and Margot 
and I don't hit it off any too well either. As a rule we don’t go 
in for such outbursts as this in our family. Still, it's by no 
means always pleasant for me. Margot's and Mummy’s natures 
are completely strange to me. I can understand my friends 
better than my own mother-too bad! 

We often discuss postwar problems, for example, how one 
ought to address servants. 

Mrs. Van Daan had another tantrum. She is terribly moody. 
She keeps hiding more of her private belongings. Mummy 
ought to answer each Van Daan “disappearance” with a Frank 
“disappearance.” How some people do adore bringing up 
other people's children in addition to their own. The Van 
Daans are that kind. Margot doesn’t need it, she is such a 
goody-goody, perfection itself, but I seem to have enough
mischief in me for the two of us put together. You should hear us 
at mealtimes, with reprimands and cheeky answers flying to 
and fro. Mummy and Daddy always defend me stoutly. I’d 
have to give up if it weren't for them. Although they do tell 
me that I mustn't talk so much, that I must be more retiring 
and not poke my nose into everything, still I seem doomed to 
failure. If Daddy wasn't so patient, I’d be afraid I was going 
to turn out to be a terrific disappointment to my parents and 
they are pretty lenient with me. 

If I take a small helping of some vegetable I detest and 
make up with potatoes, the Van Daans, and Mevrouw in
particular, can’t get over it, that any child should be so spoiled. 

“Come along, Anne, have a few more vegetables,” she says 
straight away. 

“No, thank you, Mrs. Van Daan,” I answer, “I have plenty 
of potatoes.” 

“Vegetables are good for you, your mother says so too. Have 
a few more,” she says, pressing them on me until Daddy comes 
to my rescue. 

Then we have from Mrs. Van Daan-“You ought to have 
been in our home, we were properly brought up. It’s absurd 
that Anne's so frightfully spoiled. I wouldn’t put up with it if 
Anne were my daughter.” 

These are always her first and last words “if Anne were my 
daughter.” Thank heavens I’m not! 

But to come back to this “upbringing” business. There was 
a deadly silence after Mrs. Van Daan had finished speaking 
yesterday. Then Daddy said, “I think Anne is extremely well 
brought up; she has learned one thing anyway, and that is to 
make no reply to your long sermons. As to the vegetables, 
look at your own plate.” Mrs. Van Daan was beaten, well and 
truly beaten. She had taken a minute helping of vegetables 
herself. But she is not spoiled! Oh, no, too many vegetables in 
the evening make her constipated. Why on earth doesn’t she 
keep her mouth shut about me, then she wouldn’t need to 
make such feeble excuses. It’s gorgeous the way Mrs. Van 
Daan blushes. I don’t and that is just what she hates. 

Yours, Anne 

Monday , 28 September, 1942 

Dear Kitty, 

I had to stop yesterday, long before I’d finished. I just must 
tell you about another quarrel, but before I start on that, 
something else. 

Why do grownups quarrel so easily, so much, and over the 
most idiotic things? Up till now I thought that only children 
squabbled and that that wore off as you grew up. Of course, 
there is sometimes a real reason for a quarrel, but this is just 
plain bickering. I suppose I should get used to it. But I can’t 
nor do I think I shall, as long as I am the subject of nearly 
every discussion (they use the word “discussion” instead of 
quarrel). Nothing, I repeat, nothing about me is right; my 
general appearance, my character, my manners are discussed 
from A to Z. I’m expected (by order) to simply swallow all 
the harsh words and shouts in silence and I am not used to 
this. In fact, I can t! I’m not going to take all these insults
lying down, I’ll show them that Anne Frank wasn’t born
yesterday. Then they’ll be surprised and perhaps they’ll keep their 
mouths shut when I let them see that I am going to start
educating them. Shall I take up that attitude? Plain barbarism! I’m 
simply amazed again and again over their awful manners and 
especially . . . stupidity (Mrs. Van Daan’s), but as soon as I 
get used to this-and it won’t be long-then I’ll give them some 
of their own back, and no half measures. Then they’ll change 
their tune! 

Am I really so bad-mannered, conceited, headstrong,
pushing, stupid, lazy, etc., etc., as they all say? Oh, of course not. 
I have my faults, just like everyone else, I know that, but they 
thoroughly exaggerate everything. 

Kitty, if only you knew how I sometimes boil under so many 
gibes and jeers. And I don't know how long I shall be able to 
stifle my rage. I shall just blow up one day. 

Still, no more of this, I’ve bored you long enough with all 
these quarrels. But I simply must tell you of one highly
interesting discussion at table. Somehow or other, we got on to the 
subject of Pirn’s (Daddy’s nickname) extreme modesty. Even 
the most stupid people have to admit this about Daddy.
Suddenly Mrs. Van Daan says, “I too, have an unassuming nature, 
more so than my husband.” 

Did you ever! This sentence in itself shows quite clearly 
how thoroughly forward and pushing she is! Mr. Van Daan 
thought he ought to give an explanation regarding the
reference to himself. “I don't wish to be modest— in my experience 
it does not pay.” Then to me: “Take my advice, Anne, don’t 
be too unassuming, it doesn’t get you anywhere.” 

Mummy agreed with this too. But Mrs. Van Daan had to 
add, as always, her ideas on the subject. Her next remark was 
addressed to Mummy and Daddy. “You have a strange outlook on life. Fancy saying such a thing to Anne; it was very 
different when I was young. And I feel sure that it still is,
except in your modem home.” This was a direct hit at the way 
Mummy brings up her daughters. 

Mrs. Van Daan was scarlet by this time. Mummy calm and 
cool as a cucumber. People who blush get so hot and excited, 
it is quite a handicap in such a situation. Mummy, still entirely 
unruffled, but anxious to close the conversation as soon as
possible, thought for a second and then said: “I find, too, Mrs. 
Van Daan, that one gets on better in life if one is not
over-modest. My husband, now, and Margot, and Peter are exceptionally modest, whereas your husband, Anne, you, and I, 
though not exactly the opposite, don’t allow ourselves to be 
completely pushed to one side.” Mrs. Van Daan: “But, Mrs. 
Frank, I don’t understand you; I’m so very modest and retiring, 
how can you think of calling me anything else?” Mummy: “I 
did not say you were exactly forward, but no one could say 
yon had a retiring disposition.” Mrs. Van Daan: “Let us get this 
matter cleared up, once and for all. I’d like to know in what 
way I am pushing? I know one thing, if I didn’t look after myself,
I’d soon be starving.” 

This absurd remark in self-defense just made Mummy rock 
with laughter. That irritated Mrs. Van Daan, who added a 
string of German-Dutch, Dutch-German expressions, until she 
became completely tongue-tied; then she rose from her chair 
and was about to leave the room. 

Suddenly her eye fell on me. You should have seen her. Unfortunately, at the very moment that she turned round, I was 
shaking my head sorrowfully-not on purpose, but quite involuntarily, for I had been following the whole conversation 
so closely. 

Mrs. Van Daan turned round and began to reel off a lot of 
harsh German, common, and ill-mannered, just like a coarse, 
red-faced fishwife— it was a marvelous sight. If I could draw, 
I’d have liked to catch her like this; it was a scream, such a 
stupid, foolish little person! 

Anyhow, I’ve learned one thing now. You only really get to 
know people when you’ve had a jolly good row with them. 
Then and then only can you judge their true characters! 

Yours, Anne 

Tuesday, 29 September , 1942 

Dear Kitty, 

Extraordinary things can happen to people who go into
hiding. Just imagine, as there is no bath, we use a washtub and 
because there is hot water m the office (by which I always 
mean the whole of the lower floor) all seven of us take it in 
turns to make use of this great luxury. 

But because we are all so different and some are more
modest than others, each member of the family has found his own 
place for carrying out the performance. Peter uses the kitchen 
in spite of its glass door When he is going to have a bath, he 
goes to each one of us in turn and tells us that we must not 
walk past the kitchen for half an hour. He seems to think this 
is sufficient. Mr. Van Daan goes right upstairs; to him it is 
worth the bother of carrying hot water all that way, so as to 
have the seclusion of his own room. Mrs. Van Daan simply 
doesn't bathe at all at present; she is waiting to see which is 
the best place. Daddy has his bath in the private office, Mummy behind a fire guard in the kitchen; Margot and I have 
chosen the front office for our scrub. The curtains there are 
drawn on Saturday afternoons, so we wash ourselves in semidarkness. 

However, I don't like this place any longer, and since last 
week I've been on the lookout for more comfortable quarters. 
Peter gave me an idea and that was to try the large office 
W.C. There I can sit down, have the light on, lock the door, 
pour my own bath water away, and I'm safe from prying eyes. 

I tried my beautiful bathroom on Sunday for the first time 
and although it sounds mad, I think it is the best place of all. 
Last week the plumber was at work downstairs to move the 
drains and water pipes from the office W.C. to the passage. 
This change is a precaution against frozen pipes, in case we 
should have a cold winter. The plumber's visit was far from 
pleasant for us. Not only were we unable to draw water the 
whole day, but we could not go to the W.C. either. Now it is 
rather indecent to tell you what we did to overcome this
difficulty, however, I'm not such a prude that I can't talk about 
these things. 

The day we arrived here, Daddy and I improvised a pottie 
for ourselves; not having a better receptacle, we sacrificed a 
glass preserving jar for this purpose. During the plumbers 
visit, nature's offerings were deposited in these jars in the
sitting room during the day. I don’t think this was nearly as bad 
as having to sit still and not talk the whole day. You can’t
imagine what a trial that was for “Miss Quack-Quack.” I have to 
whisper on ordinary days; but not being able to speak or move 
was ten times worse. After being flattened by three days of 
continuous sitting, my bottom was very stiff and painful. Some 
exercises at bedtime helped. 

Yours, Anne 

Thursday , 1 October > 1942 

Dear Kitty, 

I got a terrible shock yesterday. Suddenly at eight o clock 
the bell rang loudly. Of course, I thought that someone had 
come: you 11 guess who I mean. But I calmed down a bit when 
everyone said it must be some urchins or perhaps the postman. 

The days are becoming very quiet here. Lewin, a small 
Jewish chemist and dispenser, works for Mr. Kraler in the 
kitchen. He knows the whole building well and therefore we 
are always afraid that he'll take it into his head to have a peep 
in the old laboratory. We are as quiet as mice. Who, three 
months ago, would ever have guessed that quicksilver Anne 
would have to sit still for hours-and, what's more, could? 

The twenty-ninth was Mrs. Van Daan's birthday. Although 
it could not be celebrated in a big way, we managed a little 
party in her honor, with a specially nice meal, and she
received some small presents and flowers. Red carnations from 
her husband; that seems to be a family tradition. To pause for 
a moment on the subject of Mrs. Van Daan, I must tell you 
that her attempts to flirt with Daddy are a source of continual 
irritation for me. She strokes his face and hair, pulls her skirt 
right up, and makes so-called witty remarks, trying in this way 
to attract Pirn's attention. Pirn, thank goodness, doesn’t find 
her either attractive or funny, so he doesn't play ball. Mummy 
doesn’t behave like that with Mr. Van Daan, I’ve said that to 
Mrs. Van Daan’s face. 

Now and then Peter comes out of his shell and can be quite 
funny. We have one thing in common, from which everyone 
usually gets a lot of amusement: we both love dressing up. He 
appeared in one of Mrs. Van Daan’s very narrow dresses and I 
put on his suit. He wore a hat and I a cap. The grownups were 
doubled up with laughter and we enjoyed ourselves as much 
as they did. Elli has bought new skirts for Margot and me at 
Bijenkorf's. The material is rotten, just like sacking, and they 
cost 24.00 florins and 7,50 florins respectively. What a
difference compared with before the war! 

Another nice thing I've been keeping up my sleeve. Elli has 
written to some secretarial school or other and ordered a 
correspondence course in shorthand for Margot, Peter, and me. 
You wait and see what perfect experts we shall be by next 
year. In any case its extremely important to be able to write 
in a code. 

Yours, Anne 

Saturday , 3 October , 1942 

Dear Kitty, 

There was another dust-up yesterday. Mummy kicked up a 
frightful row and told Daddy just what she thought of me. 
Then she had an awful fit of tears so, of course, off I went too; 
and Td got such an awful headache anyway. Finally I told 
Daddy that I’m much more fond of him than Mummy, to 
which he replied that I’d get over that But I don’t believe it. 
I have to simply force myself to stay calm with her. Daddy 
wishes that I would sometimes volunteer to help Mummy, 
when she doesn’t feel well or has a headache; but I shan’t. I 
am working hard at my French and am now reading La Belle 
Nivermise. 

Yours, Anne 

Friday , 9 October , 1942 

Dear Kitty, 

I’ve only got dismal and depressing news for you today. 
Our many Jewish friends are being taken away by the dozen. 
These people are treated by the Gestapo without a shred 
of decency, being loaded into cattle trucks and sent to 
Westerbork, the big Jewish camp in Drente. Westerbork 
sounds terrible: only one washing cubicle for a hundred 
people and not nearly enough lavatories There is no separate 
accommodation. Men, women, and children all sleep 
together. One hears of frightful immorality because of this; 
and a lot of the women, and even girls, who stay there any 
length of time are expecting babies. 

It is impossible to escape; most of the people in the camp 
are branded as inmates by their shaven heads and many also 
by their Jewish appearance. 

If it is as bad as this in Holland whatever will it be like 
in the distant and barbarous regions they are sent to? We 
assume that most of them are murdered. The English radio 
speaks of their being gassed. 

Perhaps that is the quickest way to die. I feel terribly 
upset. I couldn't tear myself away while Miep told these 
dreadful stories; and she herself was equally wound up for 
that matter. Just recently for instance, a poor old crippled 
Jewess was sitting on her doorstep; she had been told to wait 
there by the Gestapo, who had gone to fetch a car to take 
her away. The poor old thing was terrified by the guns that 
were shooting at English planes overhead, and by the glaring 
beams of the searchlights. But Miep did not dare take her 
in; no one would undergo such a risk. The Germans strike 
without the slightest mercy. Elli too is very quiet: her boy 
friend has got to go to Germany. She is afraid that the
air-men who fly over our homes will drop their bombs, often 
weighing a million kilos, on Dirk's head. Jokes such as “he's 
not likely to get a million" and “it only takes one bomb" are 
in rather bad taste. Dirk is certainly not the only one who 
has to go: trainloads of boys leave daily. If they stop at a 
small station en route, sometimes some of them manage to 
get out unnoticed and escape; perhaps a few manage it. This, 
however, is not the end of my bad news. Have you ever heard 
of hostages? That's the latest thing in penalties for sabotage. 
Can you imagine anything so dreadful? 

Prominent citizens— innocent people— are thrown into 
prison to await their fate. If the saboteur can't be traced, the 
Gestapo simply put about five hostages against the wall. 
Announcements of their deaths appear in the papers frequently. These outrages are described as “fatal accidents." 
Nice people, the Germans! To think that I was once one 
of them too! No, Hitler took away our nationality long ago. 

In fact, Germans and Jews are the greatest enemies in the 
world. 

Yours, Anne 

Friday , 16 October , 1942 

Dear Kitty, 

Im terribly busy. I’ve just translated a chapter out of La 
Belle Nivermise and made notes of new words. Then a
perfectly foul math problem and three pages of French grammar. 
I flatly refuse to do these math problems every day. Daddy 
agrees that they’re vile. I’m almost better at them than he is, 
though neither of us are much good and we often have to 
fetch Margot. I’m the furthest on of the three of us in 
shorthand. 

Yesterday I finished The Assault. It’s quite amusing, but 
doesn’t touch Joop ter Heul. As a matter of fact, I think 
Cissy van Marxveldt is a first-rate writer. I shall definitely let 
my children read her books. Mummy, Margot, and I are as 
thick as thieves again. It’s really much better. Margot and I 
got in the same bed together last evening; it was a frightful 
squash, but that was just the fun of it. She asked if she could 
read my diary. I said “Yes-at least, bits of it”; and then I 
asked if I could read hers and she said “Yes.” Then we got on 
to the subject of the future. I asked her what she wanted to 
be. But she wouldn’t say and made a great secret of it. I 
gathered something about teaching; I’m not sure if I’m right, 
but I think so. Really, I shouldn’t be so curious! 

This morning I was lying on Peter’s bed, having chased 
him off at first. He was furious with me, not that I cared 
very much. He might be a bit more friendly with me for 
once; after all I did give him an apple yesterday. 

I asked Margot if she thought I was very ugly. She said 
that I was quite attractive and that I had nice eyes. Rather 
vague, don’t you think? 

Till next time, 

Yours, Anne 

Tuesday, 20 October, 1942 

Dear Kitty, 

My hand still shakes, although it’s two hours since we 
had the shock. I should explain that there are five fire
extinguishers in the house. We knew that someone was coming 
to fill them, but no one had warned us when the carpenter, 
or whatever you call him, was coming. 

The result was that we weren’t making any attempt to 
keep quiet, until I heard hammering outside on the landing 
opposite our cupboard door. I thought of the carpenter at 
once and warned Elli, who was having a meal with us, that 
she shouldn’t go downstairs. Daddy and I posted ourselves 
at the door so as to hear when the man left. After he d been 
working for a quarter of an hour, he laid his hammer and 
tools down on top of our cupboard (as we thought) and 
knocked at our door. We turned absolutely white. Perhaps 
' he had heard some thin g after all and wanted to investigate 
our secret den. It seemed like it. The knocking, pulling,
pushing, and wrenching went on. I nearly fainted at the thought 
that this utter stranger might discover our beautiful secret 
hiding place. And just as I thought my last hour was at hand, 
I heard Mr. Koophuis say, "Open the door, its only me. 
We opened it immediately. The hook that holds the cupboard, which can be undone by people who know the secret, 
had got jammed. That was why no one had been able to 
warn us about the carpenter. The man had now gone
downstairs and Koophuis wanted to fetch Elli, but eouldnt open 
the cupboard again. It was a great relief to me, I can tell you. 
In my imagination the man who I thought was trying to get 
m had been growing and growing in size until in the end he 
appeared to be a giant and the greatest fascist that ever walked 
the earth. 

Weill Weill Luckily everything was okay this time.
Meanwhile we had great fun on Monday. Miep and Henk spent 
the night here. Margot and I went in Mummy and Daddy s 
room for the night, so that the Van Santens could have our 
room. The meal tasted divine. There was one small
interruption. Daddy's lamp blew a fuse, and all of a sudden we 
were sitting in darkness. What was to be done? There was 
some fuse wire in the house, but the fuse box is right at the 
very back of the dark storeroom-not such a nice job after 
dark. Still the men ventured forth and after ten minutes we 
were able to put the candles away again. 

I got up early this morning. Henk had to leave at half past 
eight. After a cozy breakfast Miep went downstairs. It was 
pouring and she was glad not to have to cycle to the office. 
Next week Elli is coming to stay for a night. 

Yours, Anne 

Thursday , 29 October , 1942 

Dear Kitty, 

I am awfully worried, Daddy is ill. He has a high
temperature and a red rash, it looks like measles. Think of it, 
we can't even call a doctor! Mummy is letting him have 
a good sweat. Perhaps that will send his temperature down. 

This morning Miep told us that all the furniture has 
been removed from the Van Daans’ home. We haven’t told 
Mrs. Van Daan yet. She’s such a bundle of nerves already, 
and we don’t feel like listening to another moan over all the 
lovely china and beautiful chairs that she left at home. We 
had to leave almost all our nice things behind; so what’s the 
good of grumbling about it now? 

I’m allowed to read more grown-up books lately. I’m 
now reading Em’s Youth by Nico van Suchtelen. I can’t 
see much difference between this and the schoolgirl love 
stories. It is true there are bits about women selling themselves to unknown men in back streets. They ask a packet of 
money for it. I’d die of shame if anything like that happened 
to me. Also it says that Eva has a monthly period. Oh, I’m 
so longing to have it too; it seems so important. 

Daddy has brought the plays of Goethe and Schiller from 
the big cupboard. He is going to read to me every evening. 
We’ve started with Don Carlos. 

Following Daddy’s good example, Mummy has pressed 

her prayer book into my hand. For decency's sake I read 
some of the prayers in German; they are certainly beautiful 
but they don’t convey much to me. Why does she force me 
to be pious, just to oblige her? 

Tomorrow we are going to light the fire for the first time. 
I expect we shall be suffocated with smoke. The chimney 
hasn’t been swept for ages, let’s hope the thing draws. 

Yours, Anne Saturday , 7 November , 1942 

Dear Kitty, 

Mummy is frightfully irritable and that always seems to 
herald unpleasantness for me. Is it just a chance that Daddy 
and Mummy never rebuke Margot and that they always 
drop on me for everything? Yesterday evening, for instance: 
Margot was reading a book with lovely drawings in it; she 
got up and went upstairs, put the book down ready to go 
on with it later. I wasn’t doing anything, so picked up the 
book and started looking at the pictures. Margot came back, 
saw “her” book in my hands, wrinkled her forehead and 
asked for the book back. Just because I wanted to look a 
little further on, Margot got more and more angry. Then 
Mummy joined in: “Give the book to Margot; she was 
reading it,” she said. Daddy came into the room. He didn’t 
even know what it was all about, but saw the injured look 
on Margot’s face and promptly dropped on me: “I’d like to 
see what you’d say if Margot ever started looking at one of 
your books!” I gave way at once, laid the book down, and 
left the room-offended, as they thought. It so happened I 
was neither offended nor cross, just miserable. It wasn’t right 
of Daddy to judge without knowing what the squabble was 
about. I would have given Margot the book myself, and 
much more quickly, if Mummy and Daddy hadn’t interfered. 
They took Margot’s part at once, as though she were the 
victim of some great injustice. 

It’s obvious that Mummy would stick up for Margot; she 
and Margot always do back each other up. I’m so used to 

that that Fm utterly indifferent to both Mummy s jawing 
and Margot's moods. 

I love them; but only because they are Mummy and Margot. With Daddy it's different. If he holds Margot up as 
an example, approves of what she does, praises and caresses 
her, then something gnaws at me inside, because I adore 
Daddy. He is the one I look up to. I don't love anyone in 
the world but him. He doesn't notice that he treats Margot 
differently from me. Now Margot is just the prettiest, sweetest, most beautiful girl in the world. But all the same I feel 
I have some right to be taken seriously too. I have always 
been the dunce, the ne'er-do-well of the family, I've always 
had to pay double for my deeds, first with the scolding and 
then again because of the way my feelings are hurt. Now I'm 
not satisfied with this apparent favoritism any more. I want 
something from Daddy that he is not able to give me. 

I'm not jealous of Margot, never have been. I don't envy 
her good looks or her beauty. It is only that I long for Daddy’s 
real love: not only as his child, but for me— Anne, myself. 

I cling to Daddy because it is only through him that I 
am able to Tetain the remnant of family feeling. Daddy 
doesn’t understand that I need to give vent to my feelings 
over Mummy sometimes. He doesn’t want to talk about it; 
he simply avoids anything which might lead to remarks 
about Mummy's failings. Just the same, Mummy and her 
failings are something I find harder to bear than anything 
else. I don’t know how to keep it all to myself. I can’t always 
be drawing attention to her untidiness, her sarcasm, and her 
lack of sweetness, neither can I believe that I’m always in 
the wrong. 

We are exact opposites in everything; so naturally we 
are bound to run up against each other. I don't pronounce 
judgment on Mummy’s character, for that is something I 
can't judge. I only look at her as a mother, and she just 
doesn't succeed in being that to me; I have to be my own 
mother. I've drawn myself apart from them all; I am my 
own skipper and later on I shall see where I come to land. 
All this comes about particularly because I have in my mind's 

eye an image of what a perfect mother and wife should be; 
and in her whom I must call “Mother” I find no trace of 
that image. 

I am always making resolutions not to notice Mummy’s 
bad example. I want to see only the good side of her and to 
seek in myself what I cannot find in her. But it doesn’t work; 
and the worst of it is that neither Daddy nor Mummy understands this gap in my life, and I blame them for it. I wonder 
if anyone can ever succeed in making their children absolutely content. 

Sometimes I believe that God wants to try me, both now 
and later on; I must become good through my own efforts, 
without examples and without good advice. Then later on 
I shall be all the stronger. Who besides me will ever read 
these letters? From whom but myself shall I get comfort? 
As I need comforting often, I frequently feel weak, and dissatisfied with myself; my shortcomings are too great. I know 
this, and every day I try to improve myself, again and again. 

My treatment varies so much. One day Anne is so sensible 
and is allowed to know everything; and the next day I hear 
that Anne is just a silly little goat who doesn’t know anything at all and imagines that she’s learned a wonderful 
lot from books. I’m not a baby or a spoiled darling any more, 
to be laughed at, whatever she does. I have my own views, 
plans, and ideas, though I can’t put them into words yet. 
Oh, so many things bubble up inside me as I lie in bed, 
having to put up with people I’m fed up with, who always 
misinterpret my intentions. That’s why in the end I always 
come back to my diary. That is where I start and finish, because Kitty is always patient. I’ll promise her that I shall 
persevere, in spite of everything, and find my own way 
through it all, and swallow my tears. I only wish I could see 
the results already or occasionally receive encouragement from 
someone who loves me. 

Don’t condemn me; remember rather that sometimes I 
too can reach the bursting point. 

Yours, Anne 

ANNE FRANK 

Monday, 9 November , 1942 



Dear Kitty, , . L tt i j 

Yesterday was Peters birthday, be was sixteen. He had 
some nice presents. Among other things a game of Monopoly, 
a razor, and a lighter. Not that he smokes much, its really 

just for show. w _ , 

The biggest surprise came from Mr. Van Daan when, at 
one o’clock, he announced that the British had landed in 
Tunis, Algiers, Casablanca, and Oran. “This is the 
of the end ” everyone was saying, but Churchill, the British 
Prime Minister, who had probably heard the same thing in 
E nglan d , said: “This is not the end. It is not even the beginning of the end. But it is, perhaps, the end of the beginning. 
Do you see the difference? There is certainly reason for 
optimism. Stalingrad, the Russian town which they’ve already been defending for three months, still hasnt fallen 
into German hands. 

But to return to affairs in our secret den. I must tell you 
something about our food supply. As you know, we have 
some real greedy pigs on the top floor. We get our bread 
from a nice baker, a friend of Koophuis. We dont get so 
much as we used to at home, naturally. But it s sufficient. 
Four ration cards have also been bought illegally. Their 
price is going up all the time; it has now gone up from 
twenty-seven florins to thirty-three. And all that for a little 
slip of printed paper! In order to have something in the 
house that will keep, apart from our 150 tins of vegetables, 
we have bo ught 270 pounds of dried peas and beans. They 
are not all for us, some are for the office people. They are in 
sacks which hang on hooks in our little passage (inside the 
h idden door). Owing to the weight of the contents, a few 
stitches in the sacks hurst open. So we decided it would be 
better to put our winter store in the attic and Peter was given 
the job of dragging it all up there. 

He had managed to get five of the six sacks upstairs intact, 
and he was just busy pulling up number six, when the bottom 
seam of the sack split and a shower-no, a positive hailstorm 

of brown beans came pouring down and rattled down the 
stairs. There were about fifty pounds in the sack and the noise 
was enough to waken the dead. Downstairs they thought the 
old house with all its contents was coming down on them. 
(Thank God there were no strangers in the house.) It gave 
Peter a moment's fright. But he was soon roaring with laughter, especially when he saw me standing at the bottom of the 
stairs, like a little island in the middle of a sea of beans! I was 
entirely surrounded up to my ankles in beans. Quickly we 
started to pick them up. But beans are so slippery and small 
that they seemed to roll into all the possible and impossible 
corners and holes. Now, every time anyone goes downstairs 
they bend down once or twice, in order to be able to present 
Mrs. Van Daan with a handful of beans. 

I’d almost forgotten to mention that Daddy is quite better 
again. 

Yours, Anne 

P S. The news has just come over the radio that Algiers has 
fallen. Morocco, Casablanca, and Oran have been in British 
hands for several days. Now we're waiting for Tunis. 

Tuesday , 10 November, 1942 

Dear Kitty, 

Great news— we want to take in an eighth person. Yes, 
really! We've always thought that there was quite enough 
room and food for one more. We were only afraid of giving 
Koophuis and Kraler more trouble. But now that the appalling stories we hear about Jews are getting even worse, Daddy 
got hold of the two people who had to decide, and they 
thought it was an excellent plan. “It is just as dangerous for 
seven as for eight," they said, and quite rightly. When this 
was settled, we ran through our circle of friends, trying to 
think of a single person who would fit in well with our 
"family.” It wasn't difficult to hit on someone. After Daddy 
had refused all members of the Van Daan family, we chose a 


dentist called Albert Dussel, whose wife was fortunate enough 
to be out of the country when war broke out. He is known 
to be quiet, and so far as we and Mr. Van Daan can judge 
from a superficial acquaintance, both families think he is a 
congenial person. Miep knows him too, so she will be able to 
make arrangements for him to join us. If he comes, he will 
have to sleep in my room instead of Margot, who will use the 
camp bed. 

Yours, Anne 

Thursday , 12 November, 1942 

Dear Kitty, 

Dussel was awfully pleased when Miep told him that she 
had got a hiding place for him. She urged him to come as 
soon as possible. Preferably Saturday. He thought that this 
was rather doubtful, since he had to bring his card index up 
to date first, see to a couple of patients, and settle his accounts. Miep came to us with this news this morning. We 
thought it was unwise of him to put it off. All these preparations entail explanations to a number of people, whom we 
would rather keep out of it. Miep is going to ask if he can't 
manage to come on Saturday after all. 

Dussel said no; now he is coming on Monday. I must say I 
think it’s pretty crazy that he doesn’t jump at the proposal— 
whatever it is. If he were to get picked up outside, would he 
still be able to do his card index, settle his finances, and see to 
his patients? Why delay then? I think it’s stupid of Daddy to 
have given in. No other news — 

Yours, Anne 

Tuesday , 17 November, 1942 

Dear Kitty, 

Dussel has arrived. All went well. Miep had told him that 
he must be at a special place in front of the Post Office at 
eleven o’clock, where a man would meet him. Dussel was 

standing at the rendezvous dead on time. Mr. Koophuis, who 
knows Dussel too, went up to him and told him that the said 
gentleman could not come, but asked whether he would just 
go to Miep at the office. Koophuis got into a tram and went 
back to the office, while Dussel walked in the same direction. 
At twenty past eleven Dussel tapped at the office door. Miep 
helped him off with his coat, so that the yellow star would not 
be seen, and took him to the private office, where Koophuis 
engaged him in conversation until the charwoman had gone. 
Then Miep went upstairs with Dussel under the pretext that 
the private office was needed for something, opened the 
swinging cupboard, and stepped inside before the eyes of the 
dumfounded Dussel. 

We all sat around the table upstairs, waiting with coffee 
and cognac to greet the newcomer. Miep showed him into 
our sitting room first. He recognized our furniture at once, 
and had not the remotest idea that we were there, above his 
head. When Miep told him he nearly passed out with surprise. But luckily Miep didn’t give him much time and took 
him straight upstairs. 

Dussel sank into a chair, speechless, and looked at us all 
for a while, as if he had to really take it all in first. After a 
while he stuttered “But . . . aber, sind you not in Belgium 
then? 1st der Militar nicht come, das Auto, the escape is sie 
nicht successful?” 

We explained everything to him, that we had spread the 
story about the soldiers and the car on purpose to put people, 
and especially the Germans, on the wrong track, should they 
try to find us. 

Dussel was again struck dumb by such ingenuity and, when 
he had explored further our superpractical exquisite little 
“Secret Annexe,” he could do nothing but gaze about him in 
astonishment. 

We all had lunch together. Then he had a little nap and 
joined us for tea, tidied up his things a bit (Miep had brought 
them beforehand), and began to feel more at home. Especially when he received the following typed “Secret Annexe 
Rules” (Van Daan product). 

ANNE FRANK 

PROSPECTUS AND GUIDE TO THE “SECRET ANNEXE* 



Special institution as temporary residence 
for Jews and suchlike 

Open all the year round. Beautiful, quiet, free from woodland 
surroundings, m the heart of Amsterdam. Can be reached 
by trams 13 and 17, also by car or bicycle. In special cases 
also on foot, if the Germans prevent the use of transport. 

Board and lodging: Free. 

Special fat-free diet. 

Running water in the bathroom (alas, no bath) and down various 
inside and outside walls. 

Ample storage room for all types of goods. 

Own radio center , direct communication with London, New 
York, Tel Aviv, and numerous other stations. This appliance is only for residents’ use after six o’clock m the evening No stations are forbidden, on the understanding that 
German stations are only listened to in special cases, such 
as classical music and the like. 

Rest houis: 10 o’clock in the evening until 7:30 in the morning. 
10*15 on Sundays. Residents may rest during the day, conditions permitting, as the directors indicate For reasons of 
public security rest hours must be strictly observed! I 

Holidays (outside the home): postponed indefinitely. 

Use of language . Speak softly at all times, by order! All civilized 
languages are permitted, therefore no German! 

Lessons: One written shorthand lesson per week. English, French, 
Mathematics, and History at all times. 

Small Pets-Special Department (permit is necessary): Good 
treatment available (vermin excepted). 

Mealtimes: breakfast, every day except Sundays and Bank Holidays, 9 am Sundays and Bank Holidays, 11:30 a.m. approximately. 

Lunch: (not very big): 1:15 p.m. to 1*45 pm. 

Dimer: cold and/or hot: no fixed time (depending on the news 
broadcast). 

Duties: Residents must always be ready to help with office work. 

Baths. The washtub is available for all residents from 9 am. on 
Sundays. The W.C. kitchen, private office or mam office, 
whichever preferred, are available. 

Alcoholic Beverages: only with doctor’s prescription. 

END 

Yours, Anne 

Thursday , 19 November ■, 1942 

Dear Kitty, 

Dussel is a very nice man, just as we had all imagined. Of 
course he thought it was all right to share my little room. 

Quite honestly Fm not so keen that a stranger should use 
my things, but one must be prepared to make some sacrifices 
for a good cause, so I shall make my little offering with a good 
will. "If we can save someone, then everything else is of secondary importance,” says Daddy, and he's absolutely right. 

The first day that Dussel was here, he immediately asked 
me all sorts of questions: When does the charwoman come? 
When can one use the bathroom? When is one allowed to 
use the lavatory? You may laugh, but these things are not so 
simple in a hiding place. During the day we mustn't make 
any noise that might be heard downstairs; and if there is some 
stranger-such as the charwoman for example— then we have 
to be extra careful. I explained all this carefully to Dussel. 
But one thing amazed me; he is very slow on the uptake. He 
asks everything twice over and still doesn’t seem to remember. Perhaps that will wear off in time, and its only that he's 
thoroughly upset by the sudden change. 

Apart from that, all goes well. Dussel has told us a lot 
about the outside world, which we have missed for so long 
now. He had very sad news. Countless friends and acquaintances have gone to a terrible fate. Evening after evening the 
green and gray army lorries trundle past. The Germans ring 
at every front door to inquire if there are any Jews living in 
the house. If there are, then the whole family has to go at 
once If they don’t find any, they go on to the next house. No 
one has a chance of evading them unless one goes into hiding. Often they go around with lists, and only ring when they 
know they can get a good haul. Sometimes they let them off 
for cash— so much per head. It seems like the slave hunts of 
olden times. But it’s certainly no joke; it’s much too tragic 
for that. In the evenings when it’s dark, I often see rows of 
good, innocent people accompanied by crying children, walking on and on, in charge of a couple of these chaps, bullied 


and knocked about until they almost drop. No on© is spared 
—old people, babies, expectant mothers, the sick— each and 
all join in the march of death. 

How fortunate we are here, so well cared for and undisturbed. We wouldn't have to worry about all this misery were 
it not that we are so anxious about all those dear to us whom 
we can no longer help. 

I feel wicked sleeping in a warm bed, while my dearest 
friends have been knocked down or have fallen into a gutter 
somewhere out in the cold night. I get frightened when I 
think of close friends who have now been delivered into the 
hands of the crudest brutes that walk the earth. And all because they are Jewsl 

Yours, Anne 

Friday , 20 November , 1942 

Dear Kitty, 

None of us really knows how to take it all. The news about 
the Jews had not really penetrated through to us until now, 
and we thought it best to remain as cheerful as possible. 
Every now and then, when Miep lets out something about 
what has happened to a friend, Mummy and Mrs. Van Daan 
always begin to cry, so Miep thinks it better not to tell us any 
more. But Dussel was immediately plied with questions from 
all sides, and the stories he told us were so gruesome and 
dreadful that one can’t get them out of one’s mind. 

Yet we shall still have our jokes and tease each other, when 
these horrors have faded a bit in our minds. It won’t do us 
any good, or help those outside, to go on being as gloomy as 
we are at the moment. And what would be the object of making our “Secret Annexe” into a “Secret Annexe of Gloom”? 
Must I keep thinking about those other people, whatever I 
am doing? And if I want to laugh about something, should I 
stop myself quickly and feel ashamed that I am cheerful? 
Ought I then to cry the whole day long? No, that I can’t do. 
Besides, in time this gloom will wear off. 

Added to this misery there is another, but of a purely per

sonal kind; and it pales into insignificance beside all the 
wretchedness I’ve just told you about. Still, I can't refrain 
from telling you that lately I have begun to feel deserted. I 
am surrounded by too great a void. I never used to feel like 
this, my fun and amusements, and my girl friends, completely 
filled my thoughts. Now I either think about unhappy things, 
or about myself. And at long last I have made the discovery 
that Daddy, although he’s such a darling, still cannot take 
the place of my entire little world of bygone days. But why 
do I bother you with such foolish things? I’m very ungrateful, Kitty; I know that. But it often makes my head swim if 
I’m jumped upon too much, and then on top of that have to 
think about all those other miseries! 

Yours, Anne 

Saturday , 28 November , 1942 

Dear Kitty, 

We have used too much electricity, more than our ration. 
Result: the utmost economy and the prospect of having it 
cut off. No light for a fortnight; a pleasant thought, that, but 
who knows, perhaps it won’t happen after all! It’s too dark to 
read in the afternoons after four or half past. We pass the 
time in all sorts of crazy ways: asking riddles, physical training in the dark, talking English and French, criticizing books. 
But it all begins to pall in the end. Yesterday evening I discovered something new: to peer through a powerful pair of 
field glasses into the lighted rooms of the houses at the back. 
In the daytime we can’t allow even as much as a centimeter’s 
chink to appear between our curtains, but it can’t do any 
harm after dark. I never knew before that neighbors could he 
such interesting people. At any rate, ours are. I found one 
couple having a meal, one family was in the act of taking a 
home movie; and the dentist opposite was just attending to 
an old lady, who was awfully scared. 

It was always said about Mr. Dussel that he could get on 
wonderfully with children and that he loved them all. Now 


he shows himself in his true colors; a stodgy, old-fashioned 
disciplinarian, and preacher of long, drawn-out sermons on 
manners. 

As I have the unusual good fortune (!) to share my bedroom— alas, a small one— with His Lordship, and as Fm generally considered to be the most badly behaved of the three 
young people, I have a lot to put up with and have to pretend 
to be deaf in order to escape the old, much-repeated tickingsoff and warnings. All this wouldn’t be too bad, if he wasn’t 
such a frightful sneak and he didn’t pick on Mummy of all 
people to sneak to every time. When I’ve already just had a 
dose from him, Mummy goes over it all again, so I get a gale 
aft as well as fore. Then, if I’m really lucky, I’m called on to 
give an account of myself to Mrs. Van Daan and then I get 
a veritable hurricane! 

Honestly, you needn’t think it’s easy to be the “badly 
brought-up” central figure of a hypercritical family m hiding. 
When I lie in bed at night and think over the many sms and 
shortcomings attributed to me, I get so confused by it all that 
I either laugh or cry: it depends what sort of mood I am m. 

Then I fall asleep with a stupid feeling of wishing to be 
different from what I am or from what I want to be; peihaps 
to behave differently from the way I want to behave, or do 
behave. Oh, heavens above, now I’m getting you m a muddle 
too. Forgive me, but I don’t like crossing Sungs out, and in 
these days of paper shortage we are not allowed to throw 
paper away. Therefore I can only advise you not to read the 
last sentence again, and certainly not to try to understand it, 
because you won’t succeed anyhow! 

Yours, Anne 

Monday, 7 December, 1942 

Dear Kitty, 

Chanuka and St. Nicholas Day came almost together this 
year-just one day’s difference. We didn’t make much fuss 
about Chanuka: we just gave each other a few little presents 

and then we had the candles. Because of the shortage of 
candles we only had them alight for ten minutes, but it is all 
right as long as you have the song, Mr. Van Daan has made a 
, wooden candlestick, so that too was all properly arranged. 

Saturday, the evening of St. Nicholas Day, was much more 
fun. Miep and Elli had made us very inquisitive by whispering all the time with Daddy, so naturally we guessed that 
something was on. 

And so it was. At eight o’clock we all filed down the 
wooden staircase through the passage in pitch-darkness (it 
made me shudder and wish that I was safely upstairs again) 
into the little dark room. There, as there are no windows, we 
were able to turn on a light. When that was done, Daddy 
opened the big cupboard. “Oh! how lovely,” we all cried. A 
large basket decorated with St. Nicholas paper stood in the 
comer and on top there was a mask of Black Peter, 

We quickly took the basket upstairs with us. There was a 
nice little present for everyone, with a suitable poem attached. I got a doll, whose skirt is a bag for odds and ends; 
Daddy got book ends, and so on. In any case it was a nice idea 
and as none of us had ever celebrated St. Nicholas, it was a 
good way of starting. 

Yours, Anne 

Thursday , 10 December , 1942 

Dear Kitty, 

Mr. Van Daan used to be in the meat, sausage, and spice 
business. It was because of his knowledge of this trade that 
he was taken on in Daddy’s business. Now he is showing the 
sausagy side of himself, which, for us, is by no means disagreeable. 

We had ordered a lot of meat (under the counter, of 
course) for preserving in case we should come upon hard 
times. It was fun to watch, first the way the pieces of meat 
went through the mincer, two or three times, then how all the 
accompanying ingredients were mixed with the minced meat, 


and then how the intestine was filled by means of a spout, to 
make the sausages. We fried the sausage meat and ate it with 
sauerkraut for supper that evening, but the Gelderland sausages had to be thoroughly dried first, so we hung them 
over a stick tied to the ceiling with string. Everyone who 
came into the room began to laugh when they caught a 
glimpse of the row of sausages on show. They looked terribly 
funnyl 

The room was in a glorious mess. Mr. Van Daan was wearing one of his wife's aprons swathed round his substantial 
person (he looked fatter than he is!) and was busy with the 
meat. Hands smothered in blood, red face, and the soiled 
apron, made him look like a butcher. Mrs. Van Daan was 
trying to do everything at once, learning Dutch from a book, 
stirring the soup, watching the meat being done, sighing and 
complaining about her injured rib. That's what happens to 
elderly ladies (!) who do such idiotic exercises to reduce their 
large behinds! 

Dussel had inflammation in one eye and was bathing it 
with camomile tea by the fire. Pirn, who was sitting on a chair 
in a beam of sunlight that shone through the window, kept 
being pushed from one side to the other. In addition, I think 
his rheumatism was bothering him, because he sat rather 
hunched up with a miserable look on his face, watching Mr. 
Van Daan at work. He looked exactly like some shriveled-up 
old man from an old people’s home. Peter was doing acrobatics round the room with his cat. Mummy, Margot, and I 
were peeling potatoes; and, of course, all of us were doing 
everything wrong because we were so busy watching Mr. 
Van Daan. 

Dussel has opened his dental practice. For the fun of it, I 
must tell you about his first patient. Mummy was ironing; and Mrs. Van Daan was the first to face the ordeal. She 
went and sat on a chair in the middle of the room. Dussel 
began to unpack his case in an awfully important way, asked 
for some eau de cologne as a disinfectant and vaseline to take 
the place of wax. 

He looked in Mrs. Van Daan’s mouth and found two teeth 

which, when touched, just made her crumple up as if she was 
going to pass out, uttering incoherent cries of pain, After a 
lengthy examination (in Mrs. Van Daan’s case, lasting in 
actual fact not more than two minutes) Dussel began to 
scrape away at one of the holes. But, no fear~it was out of 
the question— the patient flung her aims and legs about 
wildly in all directions until at one point Dussel let go of the 
scraper— that remained stuck in Mrs. Van Daan’s tooth. 

Then the fat was really in the fire! She cried (as far as it 
was possible with such an instrument in one’s mouth), tried 
to pull the thing out of her mouth, and only succeeded in 
pushing it further in. Mr. Dussel stood with his hands against 
his sides calmly watching the little comedy. The rest of the 
audience lost all control and roared with laughter. It was 
rotten of us, because I for one am quite sure that I should 
have screamed even louder. After much turning, kicking, 
screaming, and calling out, she got the instrument free at last 
and Mr. Dussel went on with his work, as if nothing had happened! 

This he did so quickly that Mrs. Van Daan didn’t have 
time to start any fresh tricks. But he’d never had so much 
help in all his life before. Two assistants are pretty useful: 
Van Daan and I performed our duties well. The whole scene 
looked like, a picture from the Middle Ages entitled “A 
Quack at Work.” In the meantime, however, the patient 
hadn’t much patience; she had to keep an eye on “her” soup 
and “her” meal. One tiring is certain. Mrs. Van Daan won’t 
be in such a hurry to allow herself to be treated again! 

Yours, Anne 

Sunday, IS December, 1942 

Dear Kitty, 

I’m sitting cozily in the main office, looking outside 
through a slit in the curtain. It is dusk but still just light 
enough to write to you. 

It is a very queer sight, as I watch the people walking by; 
it looks just as if they are all in a terrible hurry and nearly 


trip over their own toes. With cyclists, now, one simply can't 
keep pace with their speed. I can’t even see what sort of person is riding on the machine. 

The people in this neighborhood don’t look very attractive. 
The children especially are so dirty yon wouldn’t want to 
touch them with a barge pole. Real slum kids with running 
noses. I can hardly understand a word they say. 

Yesterday afternoon Margot and I were having a bath here 
and I said, "Supposing we were to take the children who are 
walking past, one by one, hoist them up with a fishing rod, 
give them each a bath, wash and mend their clothes, and then 
let them go again, then . . .” Margot interrupted me, "By 
tomorrow they would look just as filthy and ragged as before.” 

But I’m just talking nonsense; besides, there are other 
things to see— cars, boats, and rain. I like particularly the 
screech of the trams as they go by. 

There is no more variety in our thoughts than there is for 
ourselves. They go round and round like a roundabout-from 
Jews to food and from food to politics. By the way, talking 
of Jews, I saw two Jews through the curtain yesterday. I 
could hardly believe my eyes; it was a horrible feeling, just as 
if I’d betrayed them and was now watching them in their 
misery. There is a houseboat immediately opposite, where a 
bargeman lives with his family. He has a small yapping dog. 
We only know the little dog by his bark and Iris tail, which 
we can see when he runs round the deck. Ugh! Now it’s 
started to rain and most of the people are hidden under 
umbrellas. I see nothing but ramcoats and occasionally the 
back of someone’s hat. Really I don’t need to see more. I’m 
gradually getting to know all the women at a glance, blown 
out with potatoes, wearing a red or a green coat, troddendown heels and with a bag under their arms. Their faces 
either look grim or kind-depending on their husbands’ dispositions. 

Yours, Anne 

Tuesday , 22 December , 1945 

Dear Kitty, 

The “Secret Annexe” has heard the joyful news that each 
person will receive an extra quarter of a pound of butter for 
Christmas. It says half a pound in the newspapers, but that’s 
only for the lucky mortals who get their ration books from 
the government, not for Jews who have gone into hiding, who 
can only afford to buy four illegal ration books, instead of 
eight. 

We are all going to bake something with our butter. I 
made some biscuits and two cakes this morning. Everyone is 
very busy upstairs and Mummy has told me I must not go 
there to work or read, until the household jobs are done. 

Mrs. Van Daan is in bed with her bruised rib, complains 
the whole day long, allows herself to be given fresh dressings 
all the time, and isn’t satisfied with anything. I shall be glad 
when she’s on her feet again and tidies up her own things, because I must say this for her; she’s exceptionally industrious 
and tidy, all the while she is healthy in mind and body. She 
is cheerful too. 

Just as if I didn’t hear enough “ssh-ssh” during the day, for 
making too much noise, my gentleman bedroom companion 
now repeatedly calls out “ssh-ssh” to me at night too. According to him, I am not even allowed to turn over! I refuse to 
take the slightest notice of him, and shall go “ssh-ssh” back 
at him the next time. 

He makes me furious, on Sundays especially, when he turns 
the light on early to do his exercises. It seems to take simply 
hours, while I, poor tormented creature, feel the chairs, which 
are placed at the head of my bed to lengthen it, slide backwards and forwards continually under my sleepy head. When 
he has ended with a couple of violent arm-waving exercises 
to loosen his muscles, His Lordship begins his toilet. His 
pants are hanging up, so to and fro he must go to collect 
them. But he forgets his tie, which is lying on the table. 
Therefore once more he pushes and bumps past the chairs 
to get it. 


But I won’t bore you any longer on the subject of old men. 
It won’t make things any better and all my plans of revenge 
(such as disconnecting the lamp, shutting die door, hiding 
his clothes) must be abandoned in order to keep the peace. 
Oh, Im becoming so sensible] One must apply one’s reason 
to everything here, learning to obey, to hold your tongue, to 
help, to be good, to give in, and I don’t know what else. I’m 
afraid I shall use up all my brains too quickly, and I haven’t 
got so very many. Then I shall not have any left for when the 
war is over. 

Yours, Anne 

Wednesday , IS January , 194S 

Dear Kitty, 

Everything has upset me again this morning, so I wasn’t 
able to finish a single thing properly. 

It is terrible outside. Day and night more of those poor 
miserable people are being dragged off, with nothing but a 
rucksack and a little money. On the way they are deprived 
even of these possessions. Families are tom apart, the men, 
women, and children all being separated. Children coming 
home from school find that their parents have disappeared. 
Women return from shopping to find their homes shut up 
and their families gone. 

The Dutch people are anxious too, their sons are being sent 
to Germany. Everyone is afraid. 

And every night hundreds of planes fly over Holland and 
go to German towns, where the earth is plowed up by their 
bombs, and every hour hundreds and thousands of people are 
killed in Russia and Africa. No one is able to keep out of it, 
the whole globe is waging war and although it is going better 
for the Allies, the end is not yet in sight. 

And as for us, we are fortunate. Yes, we are luckier than 
millions of people. It is quiet and safe here, and we are, so to 
speak, living on capital We are even so selfish as to talk about 
"after the war,” brighten up at the thought of having new 

clothes and new shoes, whereas we really ought to save every 
penny, to help other people, and save what is left from the 
wreckage after the war. 

The children here run about in just a thin blouse and clogs; 
no coat, no hat, no stockings, and no one helps them. Their 
tummies are empty, they chew an old carrot to stay the pangs, 
go from their cold homes out into the cold street and, when 
they get to school, find themselves in an even colder classroom. Yes, it has even got so bad in Holland that countless 
children stop the passers-by and beg for a piece of bread. I 
could go on for hours about all the suffering the war has 
brought, but then I would only make myself more dejected. 
There is nothing we can do but wait as calmly as we can till 
the misery comes to an end. Jews and Christians wait, the 
whole earth waits; and there are many who wait for death. 

Yours, Anne 

Saturday , SO January, 1943 

Dear Kitty, 

I’m boiling with rage, and yet I mustn’t show it. I’d like to 
stamp my feet, scream, give Mummy a good shaking, cry, and 
I don’t know what else, because of the horrible words, mocking looks, and accusations which are leveled at me repeatedly 
every day, and find their mark, like shafts from a tightly 
strung bow, and which are just as hard to draw from my 
body. 

I would like to shout to Margot, Van Daan, Dussel— and 
Daddy too— “Leave me in peace, let me sleep one night at 
least without my pillow being wet with tears, my eyes burning and my head throbbing. Let me get away from it all, 
preferably away from the world!” But I can’t do that, they 
mustn’t lmow my despair, I can’t let them see the wounds 
which they have caused, I couldn’t bear their sympathy and 
their kindhearted jokes, it would only make me want to 
scream all the more. If I talk, everyone thinks I’m showing 
off; when I’m silent they think I’m ridiculous; rude if I an

swer, sly if I get a good idea, lazy if Fm tired, selfish if I eat a 
mouthful more than I should, stupid, cowardly, crafty, etc., 
etc. The whole day long I hear nothing else but that I am an 
insufferable baby, and although I laugh about it and pretend 
not to take any notice, I do mind. I would like to ask God 
to give me a different nature, so that I didn't put everyone's 
back up. But that can't be done. Fve got the nature that has 
been given to me and Fm sure it can't be bad. I do my very 
best to please everybody, far more than they'd ever guess. I 
try to laugh it all off, because I don’t want to let them see my 
trouble. More than once, after a whole string of undeserved 
rebukes, I have flared up at Mummy: “I don't care what you 
say anyhow. Leave me alone: Fm a hopeless case anyway.” 
Naturally, I was then told I was rude and was virtually 
ignored for two days; and then, all at once, it was quite forgotten, and I was treated like everyone else again. It is impossible for me to be all sugar one day and spit venom the 
next. Fd rather choose the golden mean (which is not so 
golden), keep my thoughts to myself, and try for once to be 
just as disdainful to them as they are to me. Oh, if only I 
could! 

Yours, Anne 

Friday , 5 February , 1943 

Dear Kitty, 

Although I haven't written anything about our rows for a 
long time, there still isn’t any change. The discord, long accepted by us, struck Mr. Dussel as a calamity at first. But he 
is getting used to it now and tries not to think about it. 
Margot and Peter aren't a bit what you would call "young,” 
they are both so staid and quiet. I show up terribly against 
them and am always hearing, "You don't find Margot and 
Peter doing that— why don’t you follow their example?” I 
simply loathe it. I might tell you 1 don't want to be in the 
least like Margot. She is much too soft and passive for my 
liking and allows everyone to talk her around, and gives in 

about everything. I want to be a stronger character! But I 
keep such ideas to myself: they would only laugh at me, if I 
came along with this as an explanation of my attitude. The 
atmosphere at table is usually strained, though luckily the 
outbursts are sometimes checked by "the soup eaters”! The 
“soup eaters” are the people from the office who come in and 
are served with a cup of soup. This afternoon Mr. Van Daan 
was talking about Margot eating so little again, "I suppose 
you do it to keep slim,” he added, teasing her. Mummy, who 
always defends Margot, said loudly: “I can't bear your stupid 
chatter any longer.” Mr. Van Daan turned scarlet, looked 
straight in front of him, and said nothing. We often laugh 
about things; just recently Mrs. Van Daan came out with 
some perfect nonsense. She was recalling the past, how well 
she and her father got on together and what a flirt she was. 
“And do you know,” she went on, “if a man gets a bit aggressive, my father used to say, then you must say to him, ‘Mr. 
So and So, remember I am a lady!' and he will know what you 
mean.” We thought that was a good joke and burst out laughing. Peter too, although usually so quiet, sometimes gives 
cause for mirth. He is blessed with a passion for foreign 
words, although he does not always know their meaning. On© 
afternoon we couldn't go to the lavatory because there were 
visitors in the office; however, Peter had to pay an urgent call. 
So he didn't pull the plug. He put a notice up on the lavatory door to warn us, with “S.V.P. gas” on it. Of course he 
meant to put “Beware of gas”; but he thought the other 
looked more genteel. He hadn’t got the faintest notion it 
meant “if you please.” 

Yours, Anne 

Saturday , 27 February , 1943 

Dear Kitty, 

Pirn is expecting the invasion any day. Churchill has had 
pneumonia, but is improving slowly. The freedom-loving 
Gandhi of India is holding his umpteenth fast. Mrs. Van 

ANNE FRANK 

Daan claims to be fatalistic. But who is the most scared when 
the guns go off? No one else but Petronella. 

Henk brought a copy of the bishop’s letter to churchgoers 
for us to read. It was very fine and inspiring. “Do not rest, 
people of the Netherlands, everyone is fighting with his own 
weapons to free the country, the people, and their religion.” 
"Give help, be generous, and do not dismayl” is what they cry 
from the pulpit, just like that. Will it help? It won’t help the 
people of our religion. 

You’d never guess what has happened to us now. The 
owner of these premises has sold the house without informing 
Kraler and Koophuis. One morning the new owner arrived 
with an architect to have a look at the house. Luckily, Mr. 
Koophuis was present and showed the gentlemen everything 
except the "Secret Annexe.” He professed to have forgotten 
the key of the communicating door. The new owner didn’t 
question any further. It will be all right as long as he doesn’t 
come back and want to see the “Secret Annexe,” because then 
it won’t look too good for us. 

Daddy has emptied a card index box for Margot and me, 
and put cards in it. It is to be a book card system; then we 
both write down which books we have read, who they are by, 
etc I have procured another little notebook for foreign words. 

Lately Mummy and I have been getting on better together, 
but we still never confide in each other. Margot is more catty 
than ever and Daddy has got something he is keeping to himself, but he remains the same darling. 

New butter and margarine rationing at table! Each person 
has their little bit of fat put on their plate. In my opinion the 
Van Daans don’t divide it at all fairly. However, my parents 
are much too afraid of a row to say anything about it. Pity, I 
think you should always give people like them tit for tat. 

Yours, Anne 

Wednesday , 10 March, 1943 

Dear Kitty, 

We Rad a short circuit last evening, and on top of that the 
guns kept banging away all the time. I still haven't got over 
my fear of everything connected with shooting and planes, 
and I creep into Daddy's bed nearly every night for comfort. 
I know it's very childish but you don't know what it is like. 
The A.A. guns roar so loudly that you cant hear yourself 
speak. Mrs. Van Daan, the fatalist, was nearly crying, and 
said in a very timid little voice, “Oh, it is so unpleasant! Oh, 
they are shooting so hard,” by which she really means Tm so 
frightened.” 

It didn't seem nearly so bad by candlelight as in the dark. 
I was shivering, just as if I had a temperature, and begged 
Daddy to light the candle again. He was relentless, the light 
remained off. Suddenly there was a burst of machine-gun fire, 
and that is ten times worse than guns. Mummy jumped out of 
bed and, to Pirn's annoyance, lit the candle. When he complained her answer was firm: “After all, Anne's not exactly a 
veteran soldier.” And that was the end of it. 

Have I already told you about Mrs. Van Daan's other fears? 
I don't think so. If I am to keep you informed of all that happens in the “Secret Annexe,” you must know about this too. 
One night Mrs. Van Daan thought she heard burglars in the 
attic; she heard loud footsteps and was so frightened that she 
woke her husband. Just at that moment the burglars disappeared and the only sounds that Mr. Van Daan could hear 
were the heartbeats of the frightened fatalist herself. “Oh, 
Putti [Mr. Van Daan's nickname], they are sure to have taken 
the sausages and all our peas and beans. And Peter, I wonder 
if he is still safely in bed?” “They certainly won't have stolen 
Peter. Listen, don’t worry and let me go to sleep.” But nothing 
came of that. Mrs. Van Daan was far too nervous to sleep another wink. A few nights after that the whole Van Daan family was woken by ghostly sounds. Peter went up to the attic 
with a torch— and scamper-scamper! What do you think it 
was running away? A swarm of enormous rats ? When we knew 

ANNE FRANK 

who the thieves were, we let Mouschi sleep in the attic and 
the uninvited guests didn't come back again; at least not during the night. 

Peter went up to the loft a couple of evenings ago to fetch 
some old newspapers. He had to hold the trap door firmly to 
get down the steps. He put his hand down without looking 
. . . and went tumbling down the ladder from the sudden 
shock and pain. Without knowing it he had put his hand on 
a large rat, and it had bitten him hard. By the time he 
reached us, as white as a sheet and with his knees knocking, 
the blood had soaked through his pajamas. And no wonder; 
it's not very pleasant to stroke a large rat; and to get bitten into 
the bargain is really dreadful. 

Yours, Anne 

Friday , 12 March, 1943 

Dear Kitty, 

May I introduce someone to you: Mama Frank, champion 
of youth! Extra butter for the young; the problems of modem youth; Mummy defends youth in everything and after a 
certain amount of squabbling she always gets her way. A bottle of preserved sole has gone bad; gala dinner for Mouschi 
and Boche. You haven’t met Boche yet, although she was here 
before we went into hiding. She is the warehouse and office 
cat and keeps down the rats in the storerooms. Her odd political name requires an explanation. For some time the firm 
had two cats; one for the warehouse and one for the attic, 
Now it occasionally happened that the two cats met; and the 
result was always a terrific fight. The aggressor was always 
the warehouse cat; yet it was always the attic cat who managed to win-just like among nations. So the storehouse cat 
was named the German or “Roche” and the attic cat the English or “Tommy.” Tommy was got rid of later; we are all entertained by Boche when we go downstairs. 

We have eaten so many kidney beans and haricot beans 
that I can’t bear the sight of them any more. The mere thought 

of them makes me feel quite sick. Bread is no longer served 
in the evenings now. Daddy has just said that he doesn't feel 
in a good mood. His eyes look so sad again— poor soul! 

I can t drag myself away from a book called The Knock at 
the Door by Ina Boudier-Bakker. The story of the family is 
exceptionally well written. Apart from that, it is about war, 
writers, the emancipation of women; and quite honestly I'm 
not awfully interested. 

Horrible air raids on Germany. Mr. Van Daan is in a bad 
mood; the cause— cigarette shortage. Discussions over the 
question of whether we should, or should not, use our canned 
vegetables ended in our favor. 

I can t get into a single pair of shoes any more, except ski 
boots, which are not much use about the house. A pair of rush 
sandals costing 6.50 florins lasted me just one week, after 
which they were out of action. Perhaps Miep will scrounge 
something under the counter. I must cut Daddy's hair. Pirn 
maintains that he will never have another barber after the war, 
as I do the job so well. If only I didn't snip his ear so often! 

Yours, Anne 

Thursday , 18 March, 1943 

Dear Kitty, 

Turkey is in the war. Great excitement. Waiting in suspense 
for the news. 

Yours, Anne 

Friday , 19 March, 1943 

Dear Kitty, 

An hour later joy was followed by disappointment. Turkey 
is not in the war yet. It was only a cabinet minister talking 
about them soon giving up their neutrality. A newspaper in 
the Dam 1 was crying, “Turkey on England's side." The newspapers were tom out of his hands. This is how the joyful news 

a A square in front of the Royal Palace. 


reached us too; 500- and 1000-guilder notes have been declared no longer valid. It is a trap for black marketeers and 
suchlike, but even more for people who have got other kinds 
of “black” money, and for people in hiding. If you wish to 
hand in a 1000-guilder note you must be able to declare, and 
prove, exactly how you got it. They may still be used to pay 
taxes, but only until next week. Dussel has received an oldfashioned foot-operated dentist's drill, I expect he’ll soon give 
me a thorough check-over. The "Fiihrer aller Germanen” has 
been talking to wounded soldiers. Listening-in to it was pitiful. Question and answer went something like this: 

"My name is Heinrich Scheppel.” 

"Wounded where?” 

“Near Stalingrad.” 

"What kind of wound?” 

"Two feet frozen off and a broken joint in the left arm.” 

This is exactly what the frightful puppet show on the radio 
was like. The wounded seemed to be proud of their wounds 
-the more the better. One of them felt so moved at being able 
to shake hands with the Fiihrer (that is, if he still had a 
handl) that he could hardly get the words out of his mouth. 

Yours, Anne 

Thursday , 25 March , 1943 

Dear Kitty, 

Yesterday Mummy, Daddy, Margot, and I were sitting 
pleasantly together when suddenly Peter came in and whispered something in Daddy’s ear. I heard something about "a 
barrel fallen over in the warehouse” and "someone fumbling 
about at the door.” Margot had heard it too; but when Daddy 
and Peter went off immediately, she tried to calm me down a 
bit, because I was naturally as white as a sheet and very jittery. 

The three of us waited in suspense. A minute or two later 
Mrs. Van Daan came upstairs, she’d been listening to the 

wireless in the private office. She told us that Pim had asked 
her to turn off the wireless and go softly upstairs. But you 
know what that's like, if you want to be extra quiet, then each 
step of the old stairs creaks twice as loudly. Five minutes later 
Pim and Peter appeared again, white to the roots of their hair, 
and told us their experiences. 

They had hidden themselves under the stairs and waited, 
with no result at first. But suddenly, yes, I must tell you, they 
heard two loud bumps, just as if two doors were banged here 
in the house. Pim was upstairs in one leap. Peter warned Dussel first, who finally landed upstairs with a lot of fuss and 
noise. Then we all went up in stockinged feet to the Van 
Daans on the next floor. Mr. Van Daan had a bad cold and 
had already gone to bed, so we all drew up closely around his 
bed and whispered our suspicions to him. 

Each time Mr. Van Daan coughed loudly, Mrs. Van Daan 
and I were so scared that we thought we were going to have a 
fit. That went on until one of us got the bright idea of giving 
him some codeine, which soothed the cough at once. Again 
we waited and waited, but we heard no more and finally we 
all came to the conclusion that the thieves had taken to their 
heels when they heard footsteps in the house, which was 
otherwise so silent. 

Now it was unfortunate that the wireless downstairs was 
still tuned to England, and that the chairs were neatly arranged round it. If the door had been forced, and the air-raid 
wardens had noticed and warned the police, then the results 
might have been very unpleasant. So Mr. Van Daan got up 
and put on his coat and hat and followed Daddy cautiously 
downstairs, Peter took up the rear, armed with a large hammer in case of emergencies. The ladies upstairs (including 
Margot and me) waited in suspense, until the gentlemen reappeared five minutes later and told us that all was quiet in the 
house. 

We arranged that we would not draw any water or pull the 
plug in the lavatory. But as the excitement had affected most 
of our tummies, you can imagine what the atmosphere was 
like when we had each paid a visit in succession. 

ANNE FRANK 

When something like that happens, heaps of other things 
seem to come at the same time, as now. Number One was that 
the clock at the Westertoren, which I always find so reassuring, did not strike. Number Two was that, Mr. Vossen having 
left earlier than usual the previous evening, we didn’t know 
definitely whether Elli had been able to get hold of the key, 
and had perhaps forgotten to shut the door. It was still evening and we were still in a state of uncertainty, although we 
certainly did feel a bit reassured by the fact that from about 
eight o’clock, when the burglar had alarmed the house, until 
half past ten we had not heard a sound. On further reflection 
it also seemed very unlikely to us that a thief would have 
forced open a door so early in the evening, while there were 
still people about in the street. Moreover, one of us got the 
idea that it was possible that the caretaker of the warehouse 
next door was still at work since, in the excitement, and with 
the thin walls, one can easily make a mistake, and what’s 
more, one’s imagination can play a big part at such critical 
moments. 

So we all went to bed; but none of us could get to sleep. 
Daddy as well as Mummy and Mr. Dussel were awake, and 
without much exaggeration I can say that I hardly slept a 
wink. This morning the men went downstairs to see whether 
the outside door was still shut, and everything turned out to 
be quite safe. We gave everyone a detailed description of the 
nerve-racking event. They all made fun of it, but it is easy to 
laugh at such things afterwards. Elh was the only one who 
took us seriously. 

Yours, Anne 

Saturday , 27 March , 194S 

Dear Kitty, 

We have finished our shorthand course; now we are beginning to practice speed. Aren’t we getting clever? I must tell 
you more about my time-killing subjects (I call them such, because we have got nothing else to do but make the days go by 



as quickly as possible, so that the end of our time here comes 
more quickly); I’m mad on Mythology and especially the 
Gods of Greece and Rome. They think here that it is just a 
passing craze, they’ve never heard of an adolescent kid of my 
age being interested in Mythology. Well, then, I shall be the 
first! 

Mr. Van Daan has a cold, or rather he has a little tickle in 
his throat. He makes a tremendous fuss about it Gargling 
with camomile tea, painting his throat with tincture of myrrh, 
rubbing eucalyptus all over his chest, nose, teeth, and tongue; 
and then getting into an evil mood on top of it all. 

Rauter, one of the German big shots, has made a speech. 
“All Jews must be out of the German-occupied countries before July 1. Between April 1 and May 1 the province of 
Utrecht must be cleaned out [as if the Jews were cockroaches]. Between May 1 and June 1 the provinces of North 
and South Holland.” These wretched people are sent to filthy 
slaughterhouses like a herd of sick, neglected cattle. But I 
won’t talk about it, I only get nightmares from such thoughts. 

One good little piece of news is that the German department of the Labor Exchange has been set on fire by saboteurs. A few days after, the Registrar’s Office went the same 
way. Men in German police uniforms gagged the guards and 
managed to destroy important papers. 

Yours, Anne 

Thursday , 1 April , 1943 

Dear Kitty, 

I’m really not April-fooling (see the date), but the opposite; 
today I can easily quote the saying. “Misfortunes never come 
singly.” To begin with, Mr. Koophuis, the one who always 
cheers us up, has had hemorrhage of the stomach and has got 
to stay in bed for at least three weeks. Secondly, Elli has flu. 
Thirdly, Mr. Vossen is going to the hospital next week. He 
has probably got an abdominal ulcer. And fourthly, some important business conferences, the mam points of which Daddy 


had discussed in detail with Mr. Koophuis, were due to be 
held, but now there isn't time to explain everything thoroughly to Mr. Kraler. 

The gentlemen who had been expected duly arrived; even 
before they came Daddy was trembling with anxiety as to 
how the talks would go. "If only I could be there, if only I was 
downstairs," he cried. "Why don't you go and lie with one ear 
pressed against the floor, then you'll be able to hear everything." Daddy's face cleared, and at half past ten yesterday 
morning Margot and Pim (two ears are better than one!) took 
up their positions on the floor. The talks were not finished in 
the morning, but by the afternoon Daddy was not in a fit state 
to continue the listening campaign. He was half paralyzed 
from remaining in so unusual and uncomfortable a position. I 
took his place at half past two, as soon as we heard voices in 
the passage. Margot kept me company. The talk at times was 
so long-winded and boring that quite suddenly I fell asleep on 
the cold hard linoleum floor. Margot did not dare to touch me 
for fear they might hear us, and talking was out of the question. I slept for a good half hour and then woke with a shock, 
having forgotten every word of the important discussions. 
Luckily Margot had paid more attention. 

Yours, Anne 

Friday , 2 April , 1943 

Dear Kitty, 

Oh dear: I've got another terrible black mark against my 
name. I was lying in bed yesterday evening waiting for Daddy 
to come and say my prayers with me, and wish me good night, 
when Mummy came into my room, sat on my bed, and asked 
very nicely, "Anne, Daddy can’t come yet, shall I say your 
prayers with you tonight?" "No, Mummy,” I answered. 

Mummy got up, paused by my bed for a moment, and 
walked slowly towards the door. Suddenly she turned around, 
and with a distorted look on her face said, "I don't want to 

be cross, love cannot be forced.” There were tears in her eyes 
as she left the room. 

I lay still in bed, feeling at once that I had been horrible to 
push her away so rudely. But I knew too that I couldn't have 
answered differently. It simply wouldn't work. I felt sorry for 
Mummy; very, very sorry, because I had seen for the first time 
in my life that she mmds my coldness. I saw the look of sorrow on her face when she spoke of love not being forced. It is 
hard to speak the truth, and yet it is the truth: she herself has 
pushed me away, her tactless remarks and her crude jokes, 
which I don't find at all funny, have now made me insensitive 
to any love from her side. Just as I shrink at her hard words, 
so did her heart when she realized that the love between us 
was gone. She cried half the night and hardly slept at all. 
Daddy doesn't look at me and if he does for a second, then I 
read in his eyes the words: "How can you be so unkind, how 
can you bring yourself to cause your mother such sorrow?” 

They expect me to apologize; but this is something I can't 
apologize for because I spoke the truth and Mummy will have 
to know it sooner or later anyway. I seem, and indeed am, indifferent both to Mummy’s tears and Daddy's looks, because 
for the first time they are both aware of something which I 
have always felt. I can only feel sorry for Mummy, who has 
now had to discover that I have adopted her own attitude. For 
myself, I remain silent and aloof; and I shall not shrink from 
the truth any longer, because the longer it is put off, the more 
difficult it will be for them when they do hear it. 

Yours, Anne 

Tuesday , 27 April , 1943 

Dear Kitty, 

Such quarrels that the whole house thunders! Mummy and 
I, the Van Daans and Daddy, Mummy and Mrs. Van Daan, 
everyone is angry with everyone else. Nice atmosphere, isn't 
it? Anne's usual list of failings has been brought out again and 
fully ventilated. 


Mr. Vossen is already in the Binnengasthuis hospital. Mr. 
Koophuis is up again, the hemorrhage having stopped sooner 
than usual. He told us that the Registrar's Office received additional damage from the Fire Service who, instead of just 
quenching the flames, soaked the whole place with water. Im 
glad! 

The Carlton Hotel is smashed to bits. Two British planes 
loaded with incendiary bombs fell right on top of the “Offiziersheim/ 71 The whole Vijzelstraat-Singei comer is burned 
down. The air raids on German towns are growing in strength 
every day. We don't have a single quiet night. Tve got dark 
rings under my eyes from lack of sleep. Our food is miserable. 
Dry bread and coffee substitute for breakfast. Dinner: spinach 
or lettuce for a fortnight on end. Potatoes twenty centimeters 
long and tasting sweet and rotten. Whoever wants to follow a 
slimming course should stay in the "Secret Annexe"! They 
complain bitterly upstairs, but we don't regard it as such a 
tragedy. All the men who fought in 1940 or were mobilized 
have been called up to work for "der Fiihrer" as prisoners of 
war. Suppose they’re doing that as a precaution against invasion. 

Yours, Anne 

Saturday , I May , 1943 

Dear Kitty, 

If I just thin k of how we live here, I usually come to the 
conclusion that it is a paradise compared with how other Jews 
who are not in hiding must be living. Even so, later on, when 
everything is normal again, I shall be amazed to think that we, 
who were so spick and span at home, should have sunk to such 
a low level. By this I mean that our manners have declined. 
For instance, ever since we have been here, we have had one 
oilcloth on our table which, owing to so much use, is not one 
of the cleanest. Admittedly I often try to clean it with a dirty 
dishcloth, which is more hole than cloth. The table doesn't do 

1 Gennaa Officers* Club. 



us much credit either, in spite of hard scrubbing. The Van 
Daans have been sleeping on the same flannelette sheet the 
whole winter; one can t wash it here because the soap powder 
we get on the ration isn't sufficient, and besides it’s not good 
enough. Daddy goes about in frayed trousers and his tie is beginning to show signs of wear too. Mummy's corsets have split 
today and are too old to be repaired, while Margot goes about 
in a brassiere two sizes too small for her. 

Mummy and Margot have managed the whole winter with 
three vests between them, and mine are so small that they 
don’t even reach my tummy. 

Certainly, these are all things which can be overcome. Still, 
I sometimes realize with a shock: “How are we, now going 
about in worn-out things, from my pants down to Daddy’s 
shaving brush, ever going to get back to our prewar standards?” 

They were banging away so much last night that four times 
I gathered all my belongings together. Today I have packed a 
suitcase with the most necessary things for an escape. But 
Mummy quite rightly says: “Where will you escape to?” The 
whole of Holland is being punished for the strikes which have 
been going on in many parts of the country. Therefore a state 
of siege has been declared and everyone gets one butter 
coupon less. What naughty little children! 

Yours, Anne 

Tuesday , 18 May , 1943 

Dear Kitty, 

I witnessed a terrific air battle between German and British 
planes. Unfortunately a couple of the Allies had to jump from 
burning machines. Our milkman, who lives in Halfweg, saw 
four Canadians sitting by the roadside, one of them spoke 
fluent Dutch. He asked the milkman to give him a light for his 
cigarette, and told him that the crew had consisted of six men. 
The pilot was burned to death, and their fifth man had hidden himself somewhere. The German police came and fetched 

ANNE FRANK 72 

the four perfectly fit men. I wonder how they managed to 
have such clear brains after that terrifying parachute trip. 

Although it is fairly warm, we have to light our fires every 
other day, in order to bum vegetable peelings and refuse. We 
can't put anything in the garbage pails, because we must always think of the warehouse boy. How easily one could be 
betrayed by being a little careless! 

All students who wish either to get their degrees this year, 
or continue their studies, are compelled to sign that they are 
in sympathy with the Germans and approve of the New Order. 
Eighty per cent have refused to go against their consciences. 
Naturally they had to bear the consequences. All the students 
who do not sign have to go to a labor camp in Germany What 
will be left of the youth of the country if they have all got to 
do hard labor in Germany? Mummy shut the window last 
night because of all the banging; I was in Pirn's bed Suddenly 
Mrs. Van Daan jumped out of bed above us, just as if Mouschi 
had bitten her. A loud clap followed immediately. It sounded 
just as if an incendiary bomb had fallen beside my bed. I 
shrieked out, “Light, light 5 ” Pirn turned on the lamp. I expected nothing less than to see the room ablaze within a few 
minutes. Nothing happened. We all hurried upstairs to see 
what was going on. Mr. and Mrs. Van Daan had seen a red 
glow through the open window. He thought that there was a 
fire in the neighborhood and she thought that our house had 
caught fire. When the clap came Mrs. Van Daan was already 
on her feet with her knees knocking. But nothing more happened and we all crept back into our beds. 

Before a quarter of an hour had passed the shooting started 
up again. Mrs. Van Daan sat bolt upright at once and then 
went downstairs to Mr. Dussel's room, seeking there the rest 
which she could not find with her spouse. Dussel received her 
with the words, “Come into my bed, my child!” which sent us 
off into uncontrollable laughter. The gunfire troubled us no 
longer, our fear was banished! 

Yours, Anne 



Sunday , 13 June, 1943 

Dear Kitty, 

My birthday poem from Daddy is too good to keep from 
you. As Pim usually writes verses in German, Margot volunteered to translate it. Judge for yourself whether Margot didn’t 
do it brilliantly. After the usual summary of the events of 
the year, this is how it ran: 

Though youngest here , you are no longer small , 

But life is very hard , since one and all 
Aspire to he your teacher , thus and thus: 

“We have experience , take a tip from us? 

“We know because we did it long ago? 

“Elders are always better, you must know? 

At least that’s been the rule since life began! 

Our personal faults are much too small to scan 

This makes it easier to criticize 

The faults of others , which seem double size. 

Please hear with us, your parents, for we try 
To iudge you fairly and with sympathy. 

Correction sometimes take against your will , 

Though it's like swallowing a bitter pill, 

Which must be done if we’re to keep the peace , 

While time goes by till all this suffering cease. 

You read and study nearly all the day. 

Who might have lived in such a different way. 

You’re never bored and bring us all fresh air . 

Your only moan is this: “ What can I wear? 

1 have no knickers , all my clothes are small, 

My vest might be a loincloth, that is all ! 

To put on shoes would mean to cut off toes, 

Oh dear. I’m worried by so many woes? 

There was also a bit about food that Margot could not translate into rhyme, so I shall leave it out. Don’t you think my 
birthday poem is good? I have been thoroughly spoiled in 
other ways and received a lot of lovely things. Among other 
things a fat book on my pet subject-the mythology of Greece 
and Rome. I can’t complain of a shortage of sweets either— 
everyone has broken into their last reserves. As the Benjamin 

of the family in hiding, I am really more honored than I deserve. 

Yours, Anne 

Tuesday , IS June > 1943 

Dear Kitty, 

Lots of things have happened, but I often think that all my 
uninteresting chatter bores you very much and that you are 
glad not to receive too many letters. So I shall give you the 
news in brief. 

Mr. Vossen has not been operated on for his duodenal ulcer. 
When he was on the operating table and they had opened him 
up, the doctors saw that he had cancer, which was far too advanced to operate. So they stitched him up again, kept him in 
bed for three weeks and gave him good food, and finally sent 
him home again. I do pity him terribly and think it is rotten 
that we can t go out, otherwise I should certainly visit him 
frequently to cheer him up. It is a disaster for us that good old 
Vossen won't be able to keep us in touch with all that goes on, 
and all he hears in the warehouse. He was our best helper and 
security adviser; we miss him very much indeed. 

It will be our turn to hand in our radio next month. Koophuis 
has a clandestine baby set at home that he will let us have to 
take the place of our big Phillips. It certainly is a shame to 
have to hand in our lovely set, but in a house where people 
are hiding, one daren't, under any circumstances, take wanton 
risks and so draw the attention of the authorities. We shall 
have the little radio upstairs. On top of hidden Jews, clandestine money and clandestine buying, we can add a clandestine 
radio. Everyone is trying to get hold of an old set and to hand 
that in instead of their “source of courage." It is really true 
that as the news from outside gets worse, so the radio with its 
miraculous voice helps us to keep up our morale and to say 
again, “Chins up, stick it out, better times will come!" 

Yours, Anne 

Sunday , 11 July , 1943 

Dear Kitty, 

To return to the "upbringing” theme for the umpteenth 
time, I must tell you that I really am frying to be helpful, 
friendly, and good, and to do everything I can so that the rain 
of rebukes dies down to a light summer drizzle. It is mighty 
difficult to be on such model behavior with people you can't 
bear, especially when you don’t mean a word of it. But I do 
really see that I get on better by shamming a bit, instead of 
my old habit of telling everyone exactly what I think (although no one ever asked my opinion or attached the slightest 
importance to it) . 

I often lose my cue and simply can’t swallow my rage at 
some injustice, so that for four long weeks we hear nothing 
but an everlasting chatter about the cheekiest and most 
shameless girl on earth. Don’t you think that sometimes I’ve 
cause for complaint? It’s a good thing I’m not a grouser, because then I might get sour and bad-tempered. 

I have decided to let my shorthand go a bit, firstly to give 
me more time for my other subjects and secondly because of 
my eyes. I’m so miserable and wretched as I’ve become very 
shortsighted and ought to have had glasses for a long time already (phew, what an owl I shall look!) but you know, of 
course, in hiding one cannot. Yesterday everyone talked of 
nothing but Anne’s eyes, because Mummy had suggested 
sending me to the oculist with Mrs. Koophuis. I shook in my 
shoes somewhat at this announcement, for it is no small thing 
to do. Go out of doors, imagine it, in the street— doesn’t bear 
thinking about! I was petrified at first, then glad. But it doesn’t 
go as easily as that, because all the people who would have to 
approve such a step could not reach an agreement quickly. All 
the difficulties and risks had first to be carefully weighed, although Miep would have gone with me straight away. 

In the meantime I got out my gray coat from the cupboard, 
but it was so small that it looked as if it belonged to my 
younger sister. 

I am really curious to know what will come of it all, but I 


don t think the plan will come off because the British have 
landed in Sicily now and Daddy is once again hoping for a 
"quick finish.” 

Elli gives Margot and me a lot of office work; it makes us 
both feel quite important and is a great help to her. Anyone 
can file away correspondence and write in the sales book, but 
we take special pains. 

Miep is just like a pack mule, she fetches and carries so 
much. Almost every day she manages to get hold of some 
vegetables for us and brings everything in shopping bags on 
her bicycle. We always long for Saturdays when our books 
come. Just like little children receiving a present. 

Ordinary people simply don’t know what books mean to us, 
shut up here. Reading, learning, and the radio are our amusements. 

Yours, Anne 

Tuesday, 13 July, 1943 

Dear Kitty, 

Yesterday afternoon, with Daddy’s permission, I asked Dussel whether he would please be so good (being really very 
polite) as to allow me to use the little table in our room twice 
a week in the afternoons, from four o’clock till half past five. 
I sit there every day from half past two till four, while Dussel 
sleeps, but otherwise the room plus table are out of bounds. 
Inside, in our common room, there is much too much going 
on, it is impossible to work there, and besides, Daddy likes to 
sit at the writing table and work too sometimes. 

So it was quite a reasonable request, and the question was 
put very politely. Now honestly what do you think the very 
learned Dussel replied: "No.” Just plain "No! I was indignant 
and refused to be put off like that, so I asked him the reason 
for his "No.” But I was sent away with a flea in my ear. This 
was the barrage which followed: 

“I have to work too, and if I can’t work in the afternoons, 
then there is no time left for me at all. I must finish my task, 



otherwise I’ve started it all for nothing. Anyway, you don't 
work seriously at anything. Your mythology, now just what 
kind of work is that; knitting and reading are not work either. 
I am at the table and shall stay there.” My reply was: 

“Mr. Dussel, I do work seriously and there is nowhere else 
for me to work in the afternoons. I beg of you to kindly reconsider my request!” 

With these words the offended Anne turned her back on 
the very learned doctor, ignoring him completely. I was seedling with rage, and thought Dussel frightfully rude (which he 
certainly was) and myself very friendly. In the evening when 
I could get hold of Pirn, I told him how it had gone off and 
discussed what I should do next, because I was not going to 
give in, and preferred to clear it up myself. Pim told me how 
I ought to tackle the problem, but warned me that it would 
be better to leave it till the next day, as I was so het up. I let 
this advice go to the winds, and waited for Dussel after the 
dishes were done. Pim sat in the room next to us, which had a 
calming influence on me. I began: “Mr. Dussel, I don't suppose you see any point in discussing the matter any more, but 
I must ask you to do so.” Dussel then remarked with his 
sweetest smile: “I am always, and at all times, prepared to 
discuss this matter, but it has already been settled.” 

I went on talking, though continually interrupted by 
Dussel. “When you first came here we arranged that this 
room should be for both of us; if we were to divide it fairly, 
you would have the morning and I all the afternoon! Rut I 
don't even ask that much, and I think that my two afternoons 
are really perfectly reasonable.” At this Dussel jumped up as 
if someone had stuck a needle into him. “You can't talk 
about your rights here at all. And where am I to go, then? 
I shall ask Mr. Van Daan whether he will build a little compartment in the attic, then I can go and sit there. I simply 
can't work anywhere. With you one always gets trouble. If 
your sister Margot, who after all has more reason to ask such 
a thing, would have come to me with the same questions, I 
should not think of refusing, but you . . .” Then followed 
the business about the mythology and the knitting, and Anne 


was insulted again. However, she did not show it and let 
Dussel finish speaking: "But you, one simply cant talk to 
you. You are so outrageously selfish, as long as you can get 
what you want, you don’t mind pushing everyone else to one 
side, I’ve never seen such a child. But after all, I suppose I 
shall be obliged to give you your own way, because otherwise 
I shall be told later on that Anne Frank failed her exam 
because Mr. Dussel would not give up the table for her.” 

It went on and on and finally it was such a torrent I could 
hardly keep pace with it. At one moment I thought, “In a 
minute I’ll give him such a smack in the face that he’ll fly 
up to the ceiling together with his lies,” but the next moment 
I said to myself, “Keep calm! Such a fellow isn’t worth getting worked up about.” 

After giving final vent to his fury, Master Dussel left the 
room with an expression of mixed wrath and triumph, his 
coat stuffed with food. I dashed to Daddy and told him all 
that he had not already heard of the story. Pim decided to 
talk to Dussel the same evening, which he did. They talked 
for over half an hour. The theme of the conversation was 
something like this: first of all they talked about whether 
Anne should sit at the table, yes or no. Daddy said that he 
and Dussel had already discussed the subject once before, 
when he had professed to agree with Dussel, in order not to 
put him m the wrong in front of the young. But Daddy had 
not thought it fair then. Dussel thought that I should not 
speak as if he was an intruder who tried to monopolize everything, hut Daddy stuck up for me firmly over that, because 
he had heard for himself that I had not breathed a word of 
such a thing. 

To and fro it went, Daddy defending my selfishness and 
my “trifling” work, Dussel grumbling continually. 

Finally, Dussel had to give in after all, and I had the opportunity of working undisturbed until five o’clock for two 
afternoons a week. Dussel looked down his nose very much, 
didn’t speak to me for two days and still had to go and sit at 
the table from five till half past— frightfully childish. 

THE DIARY OF A YOUNG GIRL 79 

A person of fifty-four who is still so pedantic and smallminded must be so by nature, and will never improve. 

Yours, Anne 

Friday, 16 July, 1943 

Dear Kitty, 

Burglars again, but real this time! This morning Peter went 
to the warehouse at seven o clock as usual, and at once 
noticed that both the warehouse door and the door opening 
on to the street were ajar. He told Pirn, who tuned the radio 
in the private office to Germany and locked the door. Then 
they went upstairs together. 

The standing orders for such times were observed as usual: 
no taps to be turned on; therefore, no washing, silence, everything to be finished by eight o'clock and no lavatory. We 
were all very glad that we had slept so well and not heard 
anything. Not until half past eleven did we learn from Mr. 
Koophuis that the burglars had pushed in the outer door with 
a crowbar and had forced the warehouse door. However, they 
did not find much to steal, so they tried their luck upstairs. 
They stole two cashboxes containing forty florins, postal 
orders and checkbooks and then, worst of all, all the coupons 
for 150 kilos of sugar. 

Mr. Koophuis thinks that they belonged to the same gang 
as the ones who tried all three doors six weeks ago. They were 
unsuccessful then. 

It has caused rather a stir in the building, but the “Secret 
Annexe” can’t seem to go on without sensations like this. We 
were very glad that the typewriters and money in our wardrobe, where they are brought upstairs every evening, were 
safe. 

Yours, Anne 


Monday, 19 July, 1948 

Dear Kitty, 

North Amsterdam was very heavily bombed on Sunday. 
The destruction seems to be terrible. Whole streets lie in 
ruins, and it will take a long time before all the people are 
dug out. Up till now there are two hundred dead and countless wounded; the hospitals are crammed. You hear of children lost in the smoldering ruins, looking for their parents. I 
shudder when I recall the dull droning rumble in the distance, which for us marked the approaching destruction. 

Yours, Anne 

Friday, 23 July, 1948 

Dear Kitty, 

Just for fun I’m going to tell you each person's first wish, 
when we are allowed to go outside again. Margot and Mr. 
Van Daan long more than anything for a hot bath filled to 
overflowing and want to stay in it for half an hour. Mrs. Van 
Daan wants most to go and eat cream cakes immediately. 
Dussel thinks of nothing but seeing Lotje, his wife; Mummy 
of her cup of coffee; Daddy is going to visit Mr. Vossen first; 
Peter the town and a cinema, while I should find it so blissful, I shouldn't know where to start! But most of all, I long 
for a home of our own, to be able to move freely and to have 
some help with my work again at last, in other words-school. 

Elli has offered to get us some fruit. It costs next to nothing-grapes f.5.00 per kilo, gooseberries f.0.70 per pound, one 
peach f.0.50, one kilo melon f.1.50. 1 Then you see in the 
newspapers every evening in bold letters, "Play fair and keep 
prices down!" 

Yours, Anne 

Equivalent prices, in order, would be approximately $140, twenty-one 
cents, fourteen cents, and forty-two cents. 

Monday , 26 July , 1943 

Dear Kitty, 

Nothing but tumult and uproar yesterday, we are still very 
het up about it all. You might really ask, does a day go by 
without some excitement? 

We had the first warning siren while we were at breakfast, 
but we don't give a hoot about that, it only means that the 
planes are crossing the coast. 

After breakfast I went and lay down for an hour as I had 
a bad headache, then I went downstairs. It was about two 
o'clock. Margot had finished her office work at half past two; 
she had not packed her things together when the sirens began 
to wail, so upstairs I went again with her. It was high time, 
for we had not been upstairs five minutes when they began 
shooting hard, so much so that we went and stood in the passage. And yes, the house rumbled and shook, and down came 
the bombs. 

I clasped my "escape bag" close to me, more because I 
wanted to have something to hold than with an idea of 
escaping, because there's nowhere we can go. If ever we come 
to the extremity of fleeing from here, the street would be 
just as dangerous as an air raid. This one subsided after half 
an hour, but the activity in the house increased. Peter came 
down from his lookout post in the attic, Dussel was in the 
main office, Mrs. Van Daan felt safe in the private office, 
Mr. Van Daan had been watching from the loft, and we on 
the little landing dispersed ourselves too; I went upstairs 
to see rising above the harbor the columns of smoke Mr. 
Van Daan had told us about. Before long you could smell 
burning, and outside it looked as if a thick mist hung everywhere. Although such a big fire is not a pleasant sight, luckily 
for us it was all over, and we went about our respective tasks. 
That evening at dinner; another air raid alarm! It was a nice 
meal, but my hunger vanished, simply at the sound of the 
alarm. Nothing happened and three quarters of an hour 
later it was all clear. The dishes were stacked ready to be 
done; air-raid warning, ack-ack fire, an awful lot of planes. 


“Oh, dear me, twice in one day, that’s too much,” we all 
thought, but that didn't help at all; once again the bombs 
rained down, the other side this time, on Schiphol , 1 according to the British. The planes dived and climbed, we heard 
the hum of their engines and it was very gruesome. Each 
moment I thought: “One's falling now. Here it comes.” 

I can assure you that when I went to bed at nine o'clock 
I couldn't hold my legs still. I woke up at the stroke of 
twelve: planes. Dussel was undressing. I didn't let that put 
me off, and at the first shot, I leaped out of bed, wide awake. 
Two hours with Daddy and still they kept coming. Then they 
ceased firing and I was able to go to bed. I fell asleep at half 
past two. 

Seven o'clock. I sat up in bed with a start. Mr. Van Daan 
was with Daddy. Burglars was my first thought. I heard Mr. 
Van Daan say “everything.” I thought that everything had 
been stolen. But no, this time it was wonderful news, such 
as we have not heard for months, perhaps in all the war 
years. “Mussolini has resigned, the King of Italy has taken 
over the government.” We jumped for joy. After the terrible 
day yesterday, at last something good again and-hope. Hope 
for it to end, hope for peace. 

Kraler called in and told us that Fokkers has been badly 
damaged. Meanwhile we had another air-raid alarm with 
planes overhead and one more warning siren. I'm just about 
choked with alarms, very tired and don’t feel a bit like work. 
But now the suspense over Italy will awaken the hope that it 
will soon end, perhaps even this year. 

Yours, Anne 

Thursday , 29 July , 1948 

Dear Kitty, 

Mrs. Van Daan, Dussel, and I were doing the dishes and 
I was extraordinarily quiet, which hardly ever happens, so 
they would have been sure to notice. 

Amsterdam airport 

In order to avoid questions I quickly sought a fairly neutral 
topic, and thought that the book Henry from the Other 
Side would meet the need. But I had made a mistake. If Mrs. 
Van Daan doesn't pounce on me, then Mr. Dussel does. This 
was what it came to: Mr. Dussel had specially recommended 
us this book as being excellent. Margot and I thought it was 
anything but excellent The boys character was certainly 
well drawn, but the rest-I had better gloss over that. I said 
something to that effect while we were washing the dishes, 
but that brought me a packet of trouble. 

"How can you understand the psychology of a man! Of 
a child is not so difficult (1). You are much too young for 
a book like that; why, even a man of twenty would not be 
able to grasp it." (Why did he so especially recommend this 
book to Margot and me?) Now Dussel and Mrs. Van Daan 
continued together: “You know much too much about things 
that are unsuitable for you, you ve been brought up all wrong. 
Later on, when you are older, you won t enjoy anything, 
then you'll say: T read that in books twenty years ago/ You 
had better make haste, if you want to get a husband or fall 
in love-or everything is sure to be a disappointment to you. 
You are already proficient in the theory, it s only the practice 
that you still lack!" 

I suppose it's their idea of a good upbringing to always try 
to set me against my parents, because that is what they often 
do. And to tell a girl of my age nothing about "grown-up” 
subjects is an equally fine methodl I see the results of that 
kind of upbringing frequently and all too clearly. 

I could have slapped both their faces at that moment as 
they stood there making a fool of me. I was beside myself 
with rage and I'm just counting the days until I'm rid of 
"those" people. 

Mrs. Van Daan is a nice one! She sets a fine example . . . 
she certainly sets one— a bad one. She is well known as being 
very pushing, selfish, cunning, calculating, and is never content. I can also add vanity and coquetry to the list. There 
is no question about it, she is an unspeakably disagreeable 
person. I could write whole chapters about Madame, and 


who knows, perhaps I will someday. Anyone can put on a fine 
coat of varnish outside. Mrs. Van Daan is friendly to 
strangers and especially men, so it is easy to make a mistake 
when you have only known her for a short time. Mummy 
thinks she is too stupid to waste words over, Margot too 
unimportant, Pirn too ugly (literally and figuratively), and 
I, after long observation— for I was never prejudiced from the 
start-have come to the conclusion that she is all three and 
a lot more! She has so many bad qualities, why should I 
even begin about one of them? 

Yours, Anne 

P.S.— Will the reader take into consideration that when 
this story was written the writer had not cooled down from 
her fury! 

Tuesday , 3 August , 1943 

Dear Kitty, 

Political news excellent. In Italy the Fascist party has 
been banned. The people are fighting the Fascists in many 
places-even the army is actually taking part in the battle. 
Can a country like that wage war against England? 

We've just had a third air raid; I clenched my teeth together to make myself feel courageous. Mrs. Van Daan, who 
has always said, <C A terrible end is better than no end at all,* 
is the greatest coward of us all now. She was shaking like a 
leaf this morning and even burst into tears. When her husband, with whom she has just made it up after a week's 
squabbling, comforted her, the expression on her face alone 
almost made me feel sentimental. 

Mouschi has proved that keeping cats has disadvantages as 
well as advantages. The whole house is full of fleas, and the 
plague gets worse every day. Mr. Koophuis has scattered 
yellow powder in every nook and comer, but the fleas don't 
seem to mind a bit. It's making us all quite nervous; one 
keeps imagining an itch on one's arms, legs, and various parts 

of the body, which is why quite a lot of us are doing gymnastics, SO 1 as to be able to look at the back of our necks or 
legs while standing up. Now were being paid back for not 
bemg more supple-were too stiff to even turn our heads 
properly. We gave up real gymnastics long ago. 

Yours, Anne 

Wednesday, 4 August, 1943 

Dear Kitty, 

Now that we have been in the “Secret Annexe” for over 
a year, you know something of our lives, but some of it is 
quite i ndesc ribable. There is so much to tell, everything 
is so different from ordinary times and from ordinary people's lives. But still, to give you a closer look into our lives, 
now and again I intend to give you a description of an 
ordinary day. Today Im beginning with the evening and 
night. 

Nine o'clock in the evening. The bustle of going to bed 
in the “Secret Annexe” begms and it is always really quite 
a business. Chairs are jshoved about, beds are pulled down, 
blankets unfolded, nothing remains where it is during the 
day. I sleep on the little .divan, which is not more than one 
and a half meters long. So chairs have to be used to lengthen 
it. An eiderdown, sheets, pillows, blankets, are all fetched 
from Dussel's bed where they remain during the day. One 
hears terrible creaking in the next room: Margot's concertinabed being pulled out. Again, divan, blankets, and pillows, 
everything is done to make the wooden slats a bit more 
comfoi table. It sounds like thunder above, but it is only 
Mrs. Van Daan’s bed. This is shifted to the window, you see, 
in order to give Her Majesty in the pink bed jacket fresh air 
to tickle her dainty nostrils I 

After Peter's finished, I step into the washing cubicle, 
where I give myself a thorough wash and general toilet; it 
occasionally happens (only in the hot weeks or months) 
that there is a tiny flea floating in the water. Then teeth 

ANNE FRANK 

cleaning, hair curling, manicure, and my cotton-wool pads 
with hydrogen peroxide (to bleach black mustache hairs)all this under half an hour. 

Half past nine. Quickly into dressing gown, soap in one 
hand, pottie, hairpins, pants, curlers, and cotton wool in 
the other, I hurry out of the bathroom; but usually I’m 
called back once for the various hairs which decorate the 
washbasin in graceful curves, but which are not approved of 
by the next person. 

Ten o'clock. Put up the blackout. Good night! For at 
least a quarter of an hour there is creaking of beds and a 
sighing of broken springs, then all is quiet, at least that is if 
our neighbors upstairs don’t quarrel in bed. 

Half past eleven. The bathroom door creaks. A narrow 
strip of light falls into the room. A squeak of shoes, a large 
coat, even larger than the man inside it-Dussel returns 
from his night work in Kraler’s office. Shuffling on the floor 
for ten minutes, crackle of paper (that is the food which has 
to be stowed away), and a bed is made. Then the form disappears again and one only hears suspicious noises from the 
lavatory from time to time. 

Three o'clock. I have to get up for a little job in the metal 
pot under my bed, which is on a rubber mat for safety’s sake 
in case of leakage. When this has to take place, I always 
hold my breath, as it clatters into the tin like a brook from 
a mountain. Then the pot is returned to its place and the 
figure in the white nightgown, which evokes the same cry 
from Margot every evening: “Oh, that indecent nightdress!” 
steps back into bed. 

Then a certain person lies awake for about a quarter of 
an hour, listening to the sounds of the night. Firstly, to 
whether there might not be a burglar downstairs, then to 
the various beds, above, next door, and in my room, from 
which one is usually able to make out how the various members of the household are sleeping, or how they pass the night 
in wakefulness. 

The latter is certainly not pleasant, especially when it concerns a member of the family by the name of Dussel. First, 



I hear a sound like a fish gasping for breath, this is repeated 
nine or ten times, then with much ado and interchanged 
with little smacking sounds, the lips are moistened, followed by a lengthy twisting and turning in bed and rearranging of pillows. Five minutes 5 perfect peace and then 
the same sequence of events unfolds itself at least three 
times more, after the doctor has soothed himself to sleep 
again for a little while. It can also happen that we get a bit 
of shooting in the night, varying between one o’clock and 
four. I never really realize it, until from habit I am already 
standing at my bedside. Sometimes I’m so busy dreaming 
that fm thinking about French irregular verbs or a quarrel 
upstairs. It is some time before I begin to realize that guns 
are firing and that I am still in the room. But it usually 
happens as described above. I quickly grab a pillow and 
handkerchief, put on my dressing gown and slippers, and 
scamper to Daddy, like Margot wrote in this birthday poem: 

The first shot sounds at dead of night. 

Hush , look! A door creab open wide , 

A little girl glides into sight , 

Clasping a pillow to her side. 

Once landed in the big bed, the worst is over, except if 
the firing gets very bad. 

Quarter to seven. Trrrrr-the alarm clock that raises its 
voice at any hour of the day (if one asks for it and sometimes when one doesn’t). Crack-ping-Mrs. Van Daan has 
turned it off. Creak-Mr. Van Daan gets up. Puts on water 
and then full speed to the bathroom. 

Quarter past seven. The door creaks again. Dussel can go 
to the bathroom. Once alone, I take down the blackoutand a new day in the “Secret Annexe” has begun. 

Yours, Anne 

ANNE FRANK 

Thursday , 5 August , 194S 

Dear Kitty, 

Today I am going to take lunchtime. 

It is half past twelve. The whole mixed crowd breathes 
again. The warehouse boys have gone home now. Above one 
can hear the noise of Mrs. Van Daan’s vacuum cleaner on 
her beautiful, and only, carpet. Margot goes with a few books 
under her arm for her Dutch lesson "for children who make 
no progress/’ because that’s Dussel’s attitude. Pim goes 
into a comer with his inseparable Dickens to try and find 
peace somewhere. Mummy hurries upstairs to help the 
industrious housewife, and I go to the bathroom to tidy it 
up a bit, and myself at the same time. 

Quarter to one. The place is filling up. First Mr. Van 
Santen, then Koophuis or Kraler, Elli and sometimes Miep 
as well. 

One o'clock. We’re all sitting listening to the 
seated around the baby wireless; these are the only times when 
the members of the "Secret Annexe” do not interrupt each 
other, because now someone is speaking whom even Mr. 
Van Daan can’t interrupt. 

Quarter past one. The great share-out. Everyone from 
below gets a cup of soup and if there is ever a pudding, 
some of that as well. Mr. Van Santen is happy and goes to 
sit on the divan or lean against the writing table. Newspaper, 
cup, and usually the cat, beside him. If one of the three is 
missing he’s sure to protest. Koophuis tells us the latest 
news from town, he is certainly an excellent source of information. Kraler comes helter-skelter upstairs— a short, firm 
knock on the door and in he comes rubbing his hands, according to his mood, in a good temper and talkative, or badtempered and quiet. 

Quarter to two. Everyone rises from the table and goes 
about his own business. Margot and Mummy to the dishes. 
Mr. and Mrs. Van Daan to their divan. Peter up to the attic. 
Daddy to the divan downstairs. Dussel to his bed and Anne 
to her work. Then follows the most peaceful hour; everyone 



is asleep, no one is disturbed. Dussel dreams of lovely food 
-the expression on his face gives this away, but I don't look 
long because the time goes so fast and at four o’clock the 
pedantic doctor is standing, clock in hand, because I’m one 
minute late in clearing the table for him. 

Yours, Anne 

Monday , 9 August , , 1943 

Dear Kitty, 

To continue the "Secret Annexe” daily timetable. I shall 
now describe the evening meal: 

Mr. Van Daan begins. He is first to be served, takes a 
lot of everything if it is what he likes. Usually talks at the 
same time, always gives his opinion as the only one worth 
listening to, and once he has spoken it is irrevocable. Because if anyone dares to question it, then he flares up at 
once. Oh, he can spit like a cat— I’d rather not argue, I can 
tell you— if you’ve once tried you don’t try again. He has 
the best opinion, he knows the most about everything. All 
right then, he has got brains, but "self-satisfaction” has 
reached a high grade with this gentleman. 

Madame. Really, I should remain silent. Some days, especially if there is a bad mood coming on, you can’t look at 
her face. On closer examination, she is the guilty one in all 
the arguments. Not the subject! Oh, no, everyone prefers to 
remain aloof over that, but one could perhaps call her the 
“kindler.” Stirring up trouble, that’s fun. Mrs. Frank against 
Anne; Margot against Daddy doesn’t go quite so easily. 

But now at table, Mrs. Van Daan doesn’t go short, although she thinks so at times. The tiniest potatoes, the sweetest mouthful, the best of everything; picking over is her 
system. The others will get their turn, as long as I have the 
best. Then talking. Whether anyone is interested, whether 
they are listening or not, that doesn’t seem to matter. I 
suppose she thinks: "Everyone is interested in what Mrs. 
Van Daan says.” Coquettish smiles, behaving as if one knew 


everything, giving everyone a bit of advice and encouragement, that’s sure to make a good impression. But if you look 
longer, then the good soon wears off. 

One, she is industrious, two, gay, three, a coquette— and, 
occasionally, pretty. This is Petronella Van Daan. 

The third table companion. One doesn’t hear much from 
him. Young Mr. Van Daan is very quiet and doesn't draw 
much attention to himself. As for appetite: a Danaidean 
vessel, which is never full and after the heartiest meal declares 
quite calmly that he could have eaten double. 

Number four— Margot. Eats like a little mouse and doesn’t 
talk at all. The only things that go down are vegetables and 
fruit. "Spoiled” is the Van Daans’ judgment; "not enough 
fresh air and games” our opinion. 

Beside her-Mummy. Good appetite, very talkative. No 
one has the impression, as Mrs. Van Daan: this is the housewife. What is the difference? Well, Mrs. Van Daan does the 
cooking, and Mummy washes up and polishes. 

Numbers six and seven. I won’t say much about Daddy 
and me. The former is the most unassuming of all at table. 
He looks first to see if everyone else has something. He needs 
nothing himself, for the best things are for the children. He 
is the perfect example, and sitting beside him, the “Secret 
Annexe’s” "bundle of nerves.” 

Dr. Dussel, Helps himself, never looks up, eats and doesn't 
talk. And if one must talk, then for heaven’s sake let it be 
about food. You don’t quarrel about it, you only brag. Enormous helpings go down and the word “No” is never heard, 
never when the food is good, and not often when it’s bad. 
Trousers wrapping his chest, red coat, black bedroom slippers, 
and horn-rimmed spectacles. That is how one sees him at the 
little table, always working, alternated only by his afternoon 
nap, food, and— his favorite spot-the lavatory. Three, four, 
five times a day someone stands impatiently in front of the 
door and wriggles, hopping from one foot to the other, 
hardly able to contain himself. Does it disturb him? Not a 
bit! From quarter past seven till half past, from half past 
twelve till one o’clock, from two till quarter past, from four 



till quarter past, from six till quarter past, and from half past 
eleven until twelve. One can make a note of it— these are 
the regular “sitting times.” He wont come off or pay any 
heed to an imploring voice at the door, giving warning of 
approaching disaster! 

Number nine isn't a member of the “Secret Annexe” 
fa mil y, but rather a companion in the house and at table. 
Elli has a healthy appetite. Leaves nothing on her plate and 
is not picky-and-choosy. She is easy to please and that is just 
what gives us pleasure. Cheerful and good-tempered, willing 
and good-natured, these are her characteristics. 

Yours, Anne 

Tuesday, 10 August , 1943 

Dear Kitty, 

New idea. I talk more to myself than to the others at 
mealtimes, which is to be recommended for two reasons. 
Firstly, because everyone is happy if I don't chatter the 
whole time, and secondly, I needn't get annoyed about other 
people's opinions. I don’t think my opinions are stupid and 
the others do; so it is better to keep them to myself. I do 
just the same if I have to eat something that I simply can’t 
stand. I put my plate in front of me, pretend that it is something delicious, look at it as little as possible, and before I 
' know where I am, it is gone. When I get up in the morning, 
also a very unpleasant process, I jump out of bed thinking 
to myself: “You’ll be back in a second,” go to the window, 
take down the blackout, sniff at the crack of the window 
until I feel a bit of fresh air, and I’m awake. The bed is 
turned down as quickly as possible and then the temptation 
is removed. Do you know what Mummy calls this sort of 
thing? “The Art of Living’-that’s an odd expression. For 
the last week we’ve all been in a bit of a muddle about time, 
because our dear and beloved Westertoren clock bell has 
apparently been taken away for war purposes, so that neither 
by day nor night do we ever know the exact time. I still 

ANNE FRANK 

have some hope that they will think up a substitute (tin, 
copper or some such thing) to remind the neighborhood of 
the clock. 

Whether I’m upstairs or down, or wherever I am, my 
feet are the admiration of all, glittering in a pair of (for these 
days) exceptionally fine shoes. Miep managed to get hold 
of them secondhand for 27.50 florins, wine-colored suede 
leather with fairly high wedge heels. I feel as if Im on stilts 
and look much taller than I am. 

Dussel has indirectly endangered our lives. He actually 
let Miep bring a forbidden book for him, one which abuses 
Mussolini and Hitler. On the way she happened to be ran 
into by an S.S. car. She lost her temper, shouted, “Miserable 
wretches/' and rode on. It is better not to think of what 
might have happened if she had had to go to their headquarters. 

Yours, Anne 

Wednesday, 18 August , 1948 

Dear Kitty, 

The title for this piece is: “The communal task of the day: 
potato peeling!” 

One person fetches the newspapers, another the knives 
(keeping the best for himself, of course), a third potatoes, 
and the fourth a pan of water. 

Mr. Dussel begins, does not always scrape well, but scrapes 
incessantly, glancing right and left. Does everyone do it the 
way he does? No* “Anne, look here; I take the knife in my 
hand like this, scrape from the top downwards! No, not like 
that — like this!” 

“I get on better like this, Mr. Dussel,” I remark timidly. 

“But still this is the best way. But du kannst take dies from 
me. Naturally I don’t care a bit, abet du must know for 
yourself.” We scrape on. I look slyly once in my neighbor s 
direction. He shakes his head thoughtfully once more (over 
me, I suppose) but is silent. 



I scrape on again. Now I look to the other side, where 
Daddy is sitting; for him scraping potatoes is not just a little 
odd job, but a piece of precision work. When he reads, he 
has a deep wrinkle at the back of his head, but if he helps 
prepare potatoes, beans, or any other vegetables, then it 
seems as if nothing else penetrates. Then he has on his "potato face,” and he would never hand over an imperfectly 
scraped potato; it's out of the question when he makes that 
facel 

I work on again and then just look up for a second; I know 
it already. Mrs. Van Daan is trying to attract Dussel’s attention. First she looks in his direction and Dussel appears not 
to notice anything. Then she winks an eye; Dussel works on. 
Then she laughs, Dussel doesn’t look up. Then Mummy 
laughs too; Dussel takes no notice. Mrs. Van Daan has not 
achieved anything, so she has to think of something else. A 
pause and then: "Putti, do put on an apronl Tomorrow I 
shall have to get all the spots out of your suit!” 

Tm not getting myself dirty!” 

Another moment’s silence. 

"Putti, why don’t you sit down?” 

Tm comfortable standing up and prefer it!” Pause. 

"Putti, look, du spatst schon!” ("You are making a mess!”) 

"Yes, Mammy, I’m being careful.” 

Mrs. Van Daan searches for another subject. "I say, Putti, 
why aren’t there any English air raids now?” 

"Because the weather is bad, Kerli.” 

"But it was lovely yesterday, and they didn’t fly then 
either.” 

"Let’s not talk about it.” 

"Why, surely one can talk about it, or give one’s opinion?” 

“No.” 

"Why ever not?” 

"Do be quiet, mammi’chen.” 

“Mr. Frank always answers his wife, doesn’t he?” 

Mr. Van Daan wrestles with himself. This is his tender 
spot, it’s something he can’t take and Mrs. Van Daan begins 
again: "The invasion seems as if it will never come!” 


Mr. Van Daan goes white; when Mrs. Van Daan sees this, 
she turns red, but goes on again: "The British do nothing!” 
The bomb explodes! 

"And now hold your tongue, donnerwetter-noch-einm&ir 

Mummy can hardly hold back her laughter. I look straight 
in front of me. 

This sort of thing happens nearly every day, unless they 
have just had a very bad quarrel, because then they both 
keep their mouths shut. 

I have to go up to the attic to fetch some potatoes. Peter 
is busy there debusing the cat. He looks up, the cat notices 
— pop—he has disappeared through the open window into 
the gutter. Peter swears. I laugh and disappear. 

Yours, Anne 

Friday , 20 August , 1943 

Dear Kitty, 

The men in the warehouse go home sharp at half past 
five and then we are free. 

Half past five. Elli comes to give us our evening freedom. 
Immediately we begin to make some headway with our work. 
First, I go upstairs with Elli, where she usually begins by 
having a bite from our second course. 

Before Elli is seated, Mrs. Van Daan begins thinking of 
things she wants. It soon comes out: "Oh, Elli, I have only 
one little wish. , . .* Elli winks at me; whoever comes upstairs, Mrs. Van Daan never misses a single opportunity of 
letting them know what she wants. That must be one of the 
reasons why none of them like coming upstairs. 

Quarter to six. Elli departs. I go two floors down to have 
a look around. First to the kitchen, then to the private office, 
after that the coalhole, to open the trap door for Mouschi. 
After a long tour of inspection I land up in Kraler’s room. 
Van Daan is looking in all the drawers and portfolios to find 
the day’s post. Peter is fetching the warehouse key and Boche; 
Pim is hauling the typewriters upstairs; Margot is looking 
for a quiet spot to do her office work; Mrs. Van Daan puts a 

THE DIARY OF A YOUNG GIRL 95 

kettle on the gas ring; Mummy is coming downstairs with a 
pan of potatoes; each one knows his own job. 

Peter soon returns from the warehouse. The first question is— bread. This is always put in the kitchen cupboard 
by the Ladies; but it is not there. Forgotten? Peter offers to 
look in the main office. He crouches in front of the door to 
make himself as small as possible and crawls towards the steel 
lockers on hands and knees, so as not to be seen from outside, gets the bread, which had been put there, and disappears; at least, he wants to disappear, but before he quite 
realizes what has happened, Mouschi has jumped over him 
and gone and sat right under the writing table. 

Peter looks all around— aha, he sees him there, he crawls 
into the office again and pulls the animal by its tail. Mouschi 
spits, Peter sighs. What has he achieved? Now Mouschi is 
sitting right up by the window cleaning himself, very 
pleased to have escaped Peter. Now Peter is holding a piece 
of bread under the cat’s nose as a last decoy. Mouschi will not 
be tempted and the door closes. I stood and watched it all 
through the crack of the door. We work on. Rat, tat, tat. 
Three taps means a meal! 

Yours, Ante 

Monday , 23 August , 1943 

Dear Kitty, 

Continuation of the ‘'Secret Annexe” daily timetable. As 
the clock strikes half past eight in the morning, Margot and 
Mummy are jittery: “Ssh . . . Daddy, quiet, Otto, ssh . . . 
Pirn.” “It is half past eight, come back here, you can’t run 
any more water; walk quietly!” These are the various cries to 
Daddy in the bathroom. As the clock strikes half past eight, 
he has to be in the living room. Not a drop of water, no 
lavatory, no walking about, everything quiet. As long as 
none of the office staff are there, everything can be heard in 
the warehouse. The door is opened upstairs at twenty minutes 
past eight and shortly after there are three taps on the floor: 

ANNE FRANK 

Arne’s porridge. I climb upstairs and fetch my “puppy-dog” 
plate. Down in my room again, everything goes at terrific 
speed: do my hair, put away my noisy tin pottie, bed in 
place. Hush, the clock strikes! Upstairs Mrs. Van Daan has 
changed her shoes and is shuffling about in bedroom slippers. 
Mr. Van Daan, too; all is quiet. 

Now we have a little bit of real family life. I want to 
read or work, Margot as well, also Daddy and Mummy. 
Daddy is sitting (with Dickens and the dictionary, naturally) 
on the edge of the sagging, squeaky bed, where there aren’t 
even any decent mattresses: two bolsters on top of each other 
will also serve the purpose, then he thinks: "Mustn’t have 
them, then I’ll manage without!” 

Once he is reading he doesn’t look up, or about him, laughs 
every now and then, takes awful trouble to get Mummy 
interested in a little story. Answer: “I haven’t got time now” 
Looks disappointed for just a second, then reads on again; 
a little later, when he comes to something extra amusing, 
he tries it again: "You must read this, Mummy!” Mummy 
sits on the “Opklap” 1 bed, reads, sews, knits, or works, whatever she feels like. She suddenly thinks of something Just 
says it quickly: “Anne, do you know . . . Margot, just jot 
down . . . !” After a while peace returns once more. 

Margot closes her book with a clap. Daddy raises his eyebrows into a funny curve, his reading wrinkle deepens again, 
and he is lost in his book once more; Mummy begins to 
chatter with Margot, I become curious and listen too 1 Pirn 
is drawn into the discussion . . . nine o’clock! Breakfast! 

Yours, Anne 

Friday, 10 September, 194S 

Dear Kitty, 

Every time I write to you something special seems to 
have happened, but they are more often unpleasant than 

^Dutch type of bed, which folds against the wall to look like a bookcase 
with curtains hanging before it 

pleasant things. However, now there is something wonderful going on. Last Wednesday evening, 8 September, we 
sat around listening to the seven o clock news and the first 
thing we heard was: “Here follows the best news of the 
whole war. Italy has capitulated!” Italy’s unconditional surrender! The Dutch program from England began at quarter 
past eight. “Listeners, an hour ago, I had just finished writing the chronicle of the day when the wonderful news of 
Italy’s capitulation came in. I can tell you that I have never 
deposited my notes in the wastepaper basket with such joy!” 
“God Save the King,” the American national anthem, and 
the “Internationale” were played. As always, the Dutch 
program was uplifting, but not too optimistic. 

Still we have troubles, too; it’s about Mr. Koophuis. As 
you know, we are all very fond of him, he is always cheerful 
and amazingly brave, although he is never well, has a lot of 
pain, and is not allowed to eat much or do much walking. 
“When Mr. Koophuis enters, the sun begins to shine,” 
Mummy said just recently, and she is quite right. Now he 
has had to go into the hospital for a very unpleasant abdominal operation and will have to stay there for at least 
four weeks. You really ought to have seen how he said good-by 
to us just as usual— he might have simply been going out to 
do a bit of shopping. 

Yours, Anne 

Thursday , 16 September , 194S 

Dear Kitty, 

Relations between us here are getting worse all the time. 
At mealtimes, no one dares to open their mouths (except 
to allow a mouthful of food to slip in) because whatever 
is said you either annoy someone or it is misunderstood. 
I swallow Valerian pills every day against worry and depression, but it doesn’t prevent me from being even more miserable the next day. A good hearty laugh would help more 
than ten Valerian pills, but we’ve almost forgotten how to 

ANNE FRANK 

laugh. I feel afraid sometimes that from having to be so 
serious m grow a long face and my mouth will droop at 
the corners. The others don t get any better either, everyone looks with fear and misgivings towards that great terror, 
winter. Another thing that does not cheer us up is the fact 
that the warehouseman, V.M., is becoming suspicious about 
the “Secret Annexe.” We really wouldn’t mind what V.M. 
thought of the situation if he wasn’t so exceptionally inquisitive, difficult to fob off, and, moreover, not to be trusted. 
One day Kraler wanted to be extra careful, put on his coat 
at ten minutes to one, and went to the chemist round the 
corner. He was back in less than five minutes, and sneaked 
like a thief up the steep stairs that lead straight to us. At a 
quarter past one he wanted to go again, but Elli came to 
warn him that V.M. was in the office. He did a right-about 
turn and sat with us until half past one. Then he took off 
his shoes and went in stockinged feet to the front attic 
door, went downstairs step by step, and, after balancing 
there for a quarter of an hour to avoid creaking, he landed 
safely in the office, having entered from the outside. Elli 
had been freed of V.M. in the meantime, and came up to us 
to fetch Kraler, but he had already been gone a long time; 
he was still on the staircase with his shoes off. Whatever 
would the people in the street have thought if they had 
seen the Manager putting on his shoes outside? Gosh! the 
Manager in his socks! 

Yours, Anne 

Wednesday, 29 September , 1943 

Dear Kitty, 

It is Mrs. Van Daan’s birthday. We gave her a pot of jam, 
as well as coupons for cheese, meat, and bread. From her 
husband, Dussel, and our protectors she received things 
to eat and flowers. Such are the times we live in! 

Elli had a fit of nerves this week, she had been sent out 
so often; time and again she had been asked to go and fetch 

the diary of a YOUNG GIRL 99 

something quickly, which meant yet another errand or made 
her feel that she had done something wrong. If you just think 
that she still has to finish her office work downstairs, that 
Koophuis is ill, Miep at home with a cold, and that she herself has a sprained ankle, love worries, and a grumbling 
father, then it's no wonder she's at her wit's end. We comforted her and said that if she puts her foot down once or 
twice and says she has no time, then the shopping lists will 
automatically get shorter. 

There is something wrong with Mr. Van Daan again, I 
can see it coming on already! Daddy is very angry for some 
reason or other. Oh, what kind of explosion is hanging over 
us now? If only I wasn't mixed up so much with all these 
rows! If I could only get away! They’ll drive us crazy before 
long! 

Yours, Anne 

Sunday , 17 October , 194S 

Dear Kitty, 

Koophuis is back again, thank goodness! He still looks 
rather pale, but in spite of this sets out cheerfully to sell 
clothes for Van Daan. It is an unpleasant fact that the 
Van Daans have run right out of money. Mrs. Van Daan 
won’t part with a thing from her pile of coats, dresses, and 
shoes, Mr. Van Daan’s suit isn’t easily disposed of, because 
he wants too much for it. The end of the story is not yet in 
sight. Mrs. Van Daan will certainly have to part with her 
fur coat. They’ve had a terrific row upstairs about it, and now 
the reconciliation period of “oh, darling Putti” and “precious 
Kerli” has set in. 

I am dazed by all the abusive exchanges that have taken 
place in this virtuous house during the past month. Daddy 
goes about with his lips tightly pursed; when anyone speaks 
to him, he looks up startled, as if he is afraid he will have 
to patch up some tricky relationship again. Mummy has red 
patches on her cheeks from excitement. Margot complains 


of headaches. Dussel can’t sleep. Mrs. Van Daan grouses 
the whole day and I’m going completely crazy! Quite honestly, I sometimes forget who we are quarreling with and 
with whom we’ve made it up. 

The only way to take one’s mind off it all is to study, and 
I do a lot of that. 

Yours, Anne 

Friday , 29 October , 1948 

Dear Kitty, 

There have been resounding rows again between Mr. and 
Mrs. Van Daan. It came about like this: as I have already 
told you, the Van Daans are at the end of their money. One 
day, some time ago now, Koophuis spoke about a furrier 
with whom he was on good terms; this gave Van Daan the 
idea of selling his wife’s fur coat. It’s a fur coat made from 
rabbit skms, and she has worn it seventeen years. He got 
325 florins for it— an enormous sum. However, Mrs. Van 
Daan wanted to keep the money to buy new clothes after the 
war, and it took some doing before Mr. Van Daan made it 
clear to her that the money was urgently needed for the 
household. 

The yells and screams, stamping and abuse— you can’t possibly imagine it! It was frightening. My family stood at the 
bottom of the stairs, holding their breath, ready if necessary 
to drag them apart! All this shouting and weeping and 
nervous tension are so unsettling and such a strain, that in 
the evening I drop into my bed crying, thanking heaven that 
I sometimes have half an hour to myself. 

Mr. Koophuis is away again; his stomach gives him no 
peace. He doesn’t even know whether it has stopped bleeding yet. For the first time, he was very down when he told us 
that he didn’t feel well and was going home. 

All goes well with me on the whole, except that I have 
no appetite. I keep being told: “You don’t look at all well/’ 
I must say that they are doing their very best to keep me 



up to the mark. Grape sugar, cod-liver oil, yeast tablets, and 
calcium have all been lined up. 

My nerves often get the better of me: it is especially on 
Sundays that I feel rotten. The atmosphere is so oppressive, 
and sleepy and as heavy as lead. You don’t hear a single bird 
singing outside, and a deadly close silence hangs everywhere, 
catching hold of me as if it will drag me down deep into an 
underworld. 

At such times Daddy, Mummy, and Margot leave me 
cold. I wander from one room to another, downstairs and 
up again, feeling like a songbird whose wings have been 
clipped and who is hurling himself in utter darkness against 
the bars of his cage. “Go outside, laugh, and take a breath 
of fresh air,” a voice cries within me, but I don’t even feel a 
response any more; I go and lie on the divan and sleep, to 
make the time pass more quickly, and the stillness and the 
terrible fear, because there is no way of killing them. 

Yours, Anne 

Wednesday, 8 November , 1948 

Dear Kitty, 

In order to give us something to do, which is also educational, Daddy applied for a prospectus from the Teachers’ 
Institute in Leiden. Margot nosed through the thick book 
at least three times without finding anything to her liking 
or to suit her purse. Daddy was quicker, and wants a letter 
written to the Institute asking for a trial lesson in “Elementary Latin.” 

To give me something new to begin as well, Daddy asked 
Koophuis for a children’s Bible so that I could find out 
something about the New Testament at last. “Do you want 
to give Anne a Bible for Chanuka?” asked Margot, somewhat perturbed. “Yes— er, I think St. Nicholas Day is a 
better occasion,” answered Daddy; “Jesus just doesn’t go with 
Chanuka .” 1 

Yours, Anne 

*See entry for 7 December, 1942. 


Monday evening , 8 November, 1943 

Dear Kitty, 

If you were to read my pile of letters one after another, 
yon would certainly be struck by the many different moods 
in which they are written. It annoys me that I am so dependent on the atmosphere here, but Fm certainly not the only 
one— we all find it the same. If I read a book that impresses 
me, I have to take myself firmly in hand, before I mix with 
other people; otherwise they would think my mind rather 
queer. At the moment, as youve probably noticed, I’m going 
through a spell of being depressed. I really couldn't tell you 
why it is, but I believe it's just because Fm a coward, and 
that’s what I keep bumping up against. 

This evening, while Elli was still here, there was a long, 
loud, penetrating ring at the door. I turned white at once, 
got a tummy-ache and heart palpitations, all from fear. At 
night, when Fm in bed, I see myself alone in a dungeon, 
without Mummy and Daddy. Sometimes I wander by the 
roadside or our "Secret Annexe” is on fire, or they come 
and take us away at night. I see everything as if it is actually 
taking place, and this gives me the feeling that it may all 
happen to me very soon! Miep often says she envies us for 
possessing such tranquillity here. That may be true, but she 
is not thinking about all our fears. I simply can’t imagine 
that the world will ever be normal for us again. I do talk 
about “after the war,” but then it is only a castle in the 
air, something that will never really happen. If I think 
back to our old house, my girl friends, the fun at school, it is 
just as if another person lived it all, not me. 

I see the eight of us with our “Secret Annexe” as if we 
were a little piece of blue heaven, surrounded by heavy black 
rain clouds. The round, clearly defined spot where we stand 
is still safe, but the clouds gather more closely about us 
and the circle which separates us from the approaching 
danger closes more and more tightly. Now we are so surrounded by danger and darkness that we bump against each 



other, as we search desperately for a means of escape. We 
all look down below, where people are fighting each other, 
we look above, where it is quiet and beautiful, and meanwhile we are cut off by the great dark mass, which will not let 
us go upwards, but which stands before us as an impenetrable 
wall; it tries to crush us, but cannot do so yet. I can only cry 
and implore: “Oh, if only the black circle could recede and 
open the way for usl” 

Yours, Anne 

Thursday , 11 November, 1943 

Dear Kitty, 

I have a good title for this chapter: 

ODE TO MY FOUNTAIN FEN 
m MEMORIAM 

My fountain pen has always been one of my most priceless possessions; I value it highly, especially for its thick nib, 
for I can only really write neatly with a thick mb. My fountain pen has had a very long and interesting pen-life, which 
I will briefly tell you about. 

When I was nine, my fountain pen arrived in a packet 
(wrapped in cotton wool) as “sample without value” all the 
way from Aachen, where my Grandmother, the kind donor, 
used to live. I was in bed with flu, while February winds 
howled round the house. The glorious fountain pen had a 
red leather case and was at once shown around to all my 
friends. I, Anne Frank, the proud owner of a fountain pen! 
When I was ten I was allowed to take the pen to school and 
the mistress went so far as to permit me to write with it. 

When I was eleven, however, my treasure had to be put 
away again, because the mistress in the sixth form only 
allowed us to use school pens and inkpots. 

When I was twelve and went to the Jewish Lyceum , 1 my 

type of secondary school specializing in the classics, common in most 
continental countries. 


fountain pen received a new case in honor of the great occasion; it could take a pencil as well, and as it closed with a 
zipper looked much more impressive. 

At thirteen the fountain pen came with us to the "Secret 
Annexe,” where it has raced through countless diaries and 
compositions for me. 

Now I am fourteen, we have spent our last year together. 

It was on a Friday afternoon after five o'clock. I had 
come out of my room and wanted to go and sit at the table 
to write, when I was roughly pushed on one side and had 
to make room for Margot and Daddy, who wanted to practice their "Latin.” The fountain pen remained on the table 
unused while, with a sigh, its owner contented herself with 
a tiny little comer of the table and started rubbing beans. 
"Bean rubbing” is making moldy beans decent again. I 
swept the floor at a quarter to six and threw the dirt, together with the bad beans, into a newspaper and into the 
stove. A terrific flame leaped out and I thought it was grand 
that the fire should bum up so well when it was practically 
out All was quiet again, the “Latinites” had finished, and 
I went and sat at the table to clear up my writing things, 
but look as I might, my fountain pen was nowhere to be 
seen. I looked again, Margot looked, but there was not a trace 
of the thing, "Perhaps it fell into the stove together with 
the beans,” Margot suggested. "Oh, no, of course not!” I 
answered. When my fountain pen didn't turn up that 
evening, however, we all took it that it had been burned, 
all the more as celluloid is terribly inflammable. 

And so it was, our unhappy fears were confirmed; when 
Daddy did the stove the following morning the clip used for 
fastening was found among the ashes. Not a trace of the gold 
nib was found. "Must have melted and stuck to some stone or 
other,” Daddy thought. 

I have one consolation, although a slender one: my fountain 
pen has been cremated, just what I want later! 

Yours, Anne 



Wednesday , 17 November , 194S 

Dear Kitty, 

Shattering things are happening. Diphtheria reigns in EUfs 
home, so she is not allowed to come into contact with us for 
six weeks. It makes it very awkward over food and shopping, 
not to mention missing her companionship. Koophuis is still in 
bed and has had nothing but porridge and milk for three 
weeks. Kraler is frantically busy. 

The Latin lessons Margot sends in are corrected by a 
teacher and returned, Margot writing in EHi's name. The 
teacher is very nice, and witty, too. I expect he is glad to have 
such a clever pupil. 

Dussel is very put out, none of us knows why. It began by 
his keeping his mouth closed upstairs; he didn't utter a word 
to either Mr. or Mrs. Van Daan. Everyone was struck by it, 
and when it lasted a couple of days, Mummy took the opportunity of warning him about Mrs. Van Daan, who, if he went 
on like this, could make things very disagreeable for him. 

Dussel said that Mr. Van Daan started the silence, so he 
was not going to be the one to break it. 

Now I must tell you that yesterday was the sixteenth of 
November, the day he had been exactly one year in the “Secret 
Annexe.” Mummy received a plant in honor of the occasion, 
but Mrs. Van Daan, who for weeks beforehand had made no 
bones about the fact that she thought Dussel should treat us 
to something, received nothing. 

Instead of expressing, for die first time, his thanks for our 
unselfishness in taking him in, he didn't say a word. And when 
I asked him, on the morning of the sixteenth, whether I should 
congratulate or condole, he answered that it didn't matter to 
him. Mummy, who wanted to act as peacemaker, didn't get 
one step further, and finally the situation remained as it was. 

Der Man hat einen grossen Geist 
Und ist so Hein von TatenI 1 

Yours, Anne 

1 (The spirit of the man is great, 

"How puny are his deeds ! ) 


Saturday , 27 November , 194S 

Dear Kitty, 

Yesterday evening, before I fell asleep, who should suddenly appear before my eyes but Lies! 

I saw her in front of me, clothed in rags, her face thin and 
worn. Her eyes were very big and she looked so sadly and 
reproachfully at me that I could read in her eyes: “Oh, Anne, 
why have you deserted me? Help, oh, help me, rescue me 
from this hell!” 

And I cannot help her, I can only look on, how others suffer 
and die, and can only pray to God to send her back to us. 

I just saw Lies, no one else, and now I understand. I misjudged her and was too young to understand her difficulties. 
She was attached to a new girl friend, and to her it seemed 
as though I wanted to take her away. What the poor girl must 
have felt like, I know; I know the feeling so well myself! 

Sometimes, in a flash, I saw something of her life, but a 
moment later I was selfishly absorbed again in my own pleasures and problems. It was horrid of me to treat her as I did, 
and now she looked at me, oh so helplessly, with her pale face 
and imploring eyes. If only I could help her! 

Oh, God, that I should have all I could wish for and that 
she should be seized by such a terrible fate. I am not more 
virtuous than she; she, too, wanted to do what was right, why 
should I be chosen to live and she probably to die? What was 
the difference between us? Why are we so far from each other 
now? 

Quite honestly, I haven't thought about her for months, yes, 
almost for a year. Not completely forgotten her, but still I had 
never thought about her like this, until I saw her before me in 
all her misery. 

Oh, Lies, I hope that, if you live until the end of the war, 
you will come back to us and that I shall be able to take you 
in and do something to make up for the wrong I did you. 

But when I am able to help her again, then she will not 
need my help so badly as now. I wonder if she ever thinks of 
me; if so, what would she feel? 



Good Lord, defend her, so that at least she is not alone. Oh, 
if only You could tell her that I think lovingly of her and with 
sympathy, perhaps that would give her greater endurance. 

I must not go on thinking about it, because I don’t get any 
further. I only keep seeing her great big eyes, and cannot free 
myself from them. I wonder if Lies has real faith in herself, 
and not only what has been thrust upon her? 

I don’t even know, I never took the trouble to ask her! 

Lies, Lies, if only I could take you away, if only I could let 
you share all the things I enjoy. It is too late now, I can’t help, 
or repair the wrong I have done. Rut I shall never forget her 
again, and I shall always pray for her. 

Yours, Anne 

Monday, 6 December , 1943 

Dear Kitty, 

When St Nicholas’ Day approached, none of us could help 
thinking of the prettily decorated basket we had last year and 
I, especially, thought it would be very dull to do nothing at all 
this year. I thought a long time about it, until I invented something, something funny. 

I consulted Pim, and a week ago we started composing a 
little poem for each person. 

On Sunday evening at a quarter to eight we appeared upstairs with the large laundry basket between us, decorated 
with little figures, and bows of pink and blue carbon copy 
paper. The basket was covered with a large piece of brown 
paper, on which a letter was pinned. Everyone was rather 
astonished at the size of the surprise package. 

I took the letter from the paper and read; 

“ Santa Clam has come once more. 

Though not quite as he came before ; 

We cant celebrate his day 

In last year's fine and pleasant way. 

For then our hopes were high and bright, 

All the optimists seemed right, 


None supposing that this year 
We would welcome Santa here . 

Still, well make his spirit live, 

And since we’ve nothing left to give, 

We’ve thought of something else to do 
Each please look inside his shoe 

As each owner took his shoe from the basket there was a 
resounding peal of laughter. A little paper package lay in each 
shoe with the address of the shoe’s owner on it. 

Yours, Anne 

Wednesday , 22 December, 1943 

Dear Kitty, 

A bad attack of flu has prevented me from writing to you 
until today. It’s wretched to be ill here. When I wanted to 
cough-one, two, three— I crawled under the blankets and 
tried to stifle the noise. Usually the only result was that the 
tickle wouldn’t go away at all; and milk: and honey, sugar or 
lozenges had to be brought into operation. It makes me dizzy 
to think of all the cures that were tried on me. Sweating, compresses, wet cloths on my chest, dry cloths on my chest, hot 
drinks, gargling, throat painting, lying still, cushion for extra 
warmth, hot-water bottles, lemon squashes, and, in addition, 
the thermometer every two hours! 

Can anyone really get better like this? The worst moment 
of all was certainly when Mr. Dussel thought he’d play doctor, 
and came and lay on my naked chest with his greasy head, in 
order to listen to the sounds within. Not only did his hair tickle 
unbearably, but I was embarrassed, in spite of the fact that he 
once, thirty years ago, studied medicine and has the title of 
Doctor. Why should the fellow come and lie on my heart? 
He’s not my lover, after all! For that matter, he wouldn’t hear 
whether it’s healthy or unhealthy inside me anyway; his ears 
need syringing first, as he’s becoming alarmingly hard of 
hearing. 

But that is enough about illness. I’m as fit as a fiddle again, 

THE DIARY OF A YOUNG GIRL 109 

one centimeter taller, two pounds Heavier, pale, and with a 
real appetite for learning. 

There is not much news to tell you. We are all getting on 
well together for a change! There's no quarreling—we haven’t 
had such peace in the home for at least half a year. Elli is 
still parted from us. 

We received extra oil for Christmas, sweets and syrup; the 
“chief present” is a brooch, made out of a two-and-a-half-cent 
piece, and shining beautifully. Anyway, lovely, but indescribable. Mr. Dussel gave Mummy and Mrs. Van Daan a lovely 
cake which he had asked Miep to bake for him. With all her 
work, she has to do that as well! I have also something for 
Miep and Elli. For at least two months I have saved the sugar 
from my porridge, you see, and with Mr. Koophuis’s help I’ll 
have it made into fondants. 

It is drizzly weather, the stove smells, the food lies heavily 
on everybody’s tummy, causing thunderous noises on all sides! 
The war at a standstill, morale rotten. 

Yours, Anne 

Friday , 24 December , 1943 

Dear Kitty, 

I have previously written about how much we are affected 
by atmospheres here, and I think that in my own case this 
trouble is getting much worse lately. 

“Himmelhoch jauchzend und zum Tode betriiht” 1 certainly 
fits here. I am “Himmelhoch jauchzend” if I only think how 
lucky we are here compared with other Jewish children, and 
“zum Tode betrubf comes over me when, as happened today, 
for example, Mrs. Koophuis comes and tells us about her 
daughter Corry’s hockey club, canoe trips, theatrical performances, and friends. I don’t think I’m jealous of Corry, but 
I couldn’t help feeling a great longing to have lots of fun myself for once, and to laugh until my tummy ached. Especially 

X A famous line from Goethe: “On top of the world, or in the depths of 
despair.” 


at this time of the year with all the holidays for Christmas and 
the New Year, and we are stuck here like outcasts. Still, I really ought not to write this, because it seems ungrateful and I’ve 
certainly been exaggerating. But still, whatever you think of 
me, I can’t keep everything to myself, so I’ll remind you of 
my opening words— “Paper is patient.” 

When someone comes in from outside, with the wind in 
their clothes and the cold on their faces, then I could bury my 
head in the blankets to stop myself thinking: “When will we 
be granted the privilege of smelling fresh air?” And because I 
must not bury my head in the blankets, but the reverse— I 
must keep my head high and be brave, the thoughts will 
come, not once, but oh, countless times. Believe me, if you 
have been shut up for a year and a half, it can get too much 
for you some days. In spite of all justice and thankfulness, you 
can’t crush your feelings. Cycling, dancing, whistling, looking 
out into the world, feeling young, to know that I’m free— 
that’s what I long for; still, I mustn’t show if, because I sometimes think if all eight of us began to pity ourselves, or went 
about with discontented faces, where would it lead us? I 
sometimes ask myself, “Would anyone, either Jew or non-Jew, 
understand this about me, that I am simply a young girl badly 
in need of some rollicking fun?” I don’t know, and I couldn’t 
talk about it to anyone, because then I know I should cry. 
Crying can bring such relief. 

In spite of all my theories, and however much trouble I 
take, each day I miss having a real mother who understands 
me. That is why with everything I do and write I think of the 
“Mumsie” that I want to be for my children later on. The 
“Mumsie” who doesn’t take everything that is said in general 
conversation so seriously, but who does take what 1 say seriously. I have noticed, though I can’t explain how, that the 
word “Mumsie” tells you everything. Do you know what I’ve 
found? To give me the feeling of calling Mummy something 
which sounds like “Mumsie” I often call her “Mum”; then 
from that comes “Mums”: the incomplete “Mumsie,” as it 
were, whom I would so love to honor with the extra “ie” and 

yet who does not realize it It’s a good thing, because it would 
only make her unhappy. 

That’s enough about that, writing has made my “zum Tode 
hetrubf go off a bit. 

Yours, Anne 

Saturday, 25 December , 1943 

Dear Kitty, 

During these days, now that Christmas is here, I find myself 
thinking all the time about Km, and what he told me about 
the love of his youth. Last year I didn’t understand the meaning of his words as well as I do now. If he’d only talk about it 
again, perhaps I would be able to show him that I understand. 

I believe that Pirn talked about it because he who “knows 
the secrets of so many other hearts” had to express his own 
feelings for once; because otherwise Pirn never says a word 
about himself, and I don’t think Margot has any idea of all 
Pirn has had to go through. Poor Pirn, he can’t make me think 
that he has forgotten everything. He will never forget this. He 
has become very tolerant. I hope that I shall grow a bit like 
him, without having to go through all that. 

Yours, Anne 

Monday , 27 December , 1943 

Dear Kitty, 

On Friday evening for the first time in my life I received 
something for Christmas. Koophuis, Kraler and the girls had 
prepared a lovely surprise again. Miep has made a lovely 
Christmas cake, on which was written “Peaee 1944.” Elli had 
provided a pound of sweet biscuits of prewar quality. For 
Peter, Margot, and me a bottle of yoghourt, and a bottle of 
beer for each of the grownups. Everything was so nicely done 
up, and there were pictures stuck on the different packages. 
Otherwise Christmas passed by quickly for us. 

Yours, Anne 


Wednesday , 29 December , 1943 

Dear Kitty, 

I was very unhappy again last evening. Granny and Lies 
came into my mind. Granny, oh, darling Granny, how little 
we understood of what she suffered, or how sweet she was. 
And besides all this, she knew a terrible secret which she 
carefully kept to herself the whole time . 1 How faithful and 
good Granny always was; she would never have let one of us 
down. Whatever it was, however naughty I had been, Granny 
always stuck up for me. 

Granny, did you love me or didn’t you understand me 
either? I don’t know. No one ever talked about themselves to 
Granny. How lonely Granny must have been, how lonely in 
spite of us! A person can be lonely even if he is loved by many 
people, because he is still not the “One and Only” to anyone. 

And Lies, is she still alive? What is she doing? Oh, God, 
protect her and bring her back to us. Lies, I see in you all the 
time what my lot might have been, I keep seeing myself in 
your place. Why then should I often be unhappy over what 
happens here? Shouldn’t I always be glad, contented, and 
happy, except when I think about her and her companions in 
distress? I am selfish and cowardly. Why do I always dream 
and think of the most terrible things-my fear makes me want 
to scream out loud sometimes. Because still, in spite of everything, I have not enough faith in God. He has given me so 
much-which I certainly do not deserve-and I still do so much 
that is wrong every day. If you think of your fellow creatures, 
then you only want to cry, you could really cry the whole day 
long. The only thing to do is to pray that God will perform a 
miracle and save some of them. And I hope that I am doing 
that enough. 

Yours, Anne 

Sunday, 2 January , 1944 

Dear Kitty, 

This morning when I had nothing to do I turned over some 
of the pages of my diary and several times I came across letters dealing with the subject “Mummy” in such a hotheaded 
way that I was quite shocked, and asked myself: “Anne, is it 
really you who mentioned hate? Oh, Anne, how could youl” 
I remained sitting with the open page in my hand, and 
thought about it and how it came about that I should have 
been so brimful of rage and really so filled with such a thing 
as hate that I had to confide it all in you. I have been trying 
to understand the Anne of a year ago and to excuse her, because my conscience isn’t clear as long as I leave you with 
these accusations, without being able to explain, on looking 
back, how it happened. 

I suffer now— and suffered then-from moods which kept my 
head under water (so to speak) and only allowed me to see 
the things subjectively without enabling me to consider quietly the words of the other side, and to answer them as the 
words of one whom I, with my hotheaded temperament, had 
offended or made unhappy. 

I hid myself within myself, I only considered myself and 
quietly wrote down all my joys, sorrows, and contempt in my 
diary. This diary is of great value to me, because it has become a book of memoirs in many places, but on a good many 
pages I could certainly put “past and done with ” 

I used to be furious with Mummy, and still am sometimes. 
It’s true that she doesn’t understand me, but I don’t understand her either. She did love me very much and she was 
tender, but as she landed in so many unpleasant situations 
through me, and was nervous and irritable because of other 
worries and difficulties, it is certainly understandable that she 
snapped at me. 

I took it much too seriously, was offended, and was rude 
and aggravating to Mummy, which, in turn, made her unhappy. So it was really a matter of unpleasantness and misery 


rebounding all the time. It wasn't nice for either of us, but it is 
passing. 

I just didn't want to see all this, and pitied myself very 
much; but that, too, is understandable. Those violent outbursts on paper were only giving vent to anger which in a 
normal life could have been worked off by stamping my feet 
a couple of times in a locked room, or calling Mummy names 
behind her back. 

The period when I caused Mummy to shed tears is over. I 
have grown wiser and Mummy's nerves are not so much on 
edge. I usually keep my mouth shut if I get annoyed, and so 
does she, so we appear to get on much better together. I can’t 
really love Mummy in a dependent childlike way—I just don’t 
have that feeling. 

I soothe my conscience now with the thought that it is better for hard words to be on paper than that Mummy should 
carry them in her heart. 

Yours, Anne 

Wednesday , 5 January , 1944 

Dear Kitty, 

I have two things to confess to you today, which will take a 
long time. But I must tell someone and you are the best one 
to tell, as I know that, come what may, you always keep a 
secret. 

The first is about Mummy. You know that I've grumbled a 
lot about Mummy, yet still tried to be nice to her again. Now 
it is suddenly clear to me what she lacks. Mummy herself has 
told us that she looked upon us more as her friends than her 
daughters. Now that is all very fine, but still, a friend can't 
take a mother's place. I need my mother as an example which 
I can follow, I want to be able to respect her. I have the feeling that Margot thinks differently about these things and 
would never be able to understand what I've just told you. 
And Daddy avoids all arguments about Mummy. 

I imagine a mother as a woman who, in the first place, 

THE DIARY OF A YOUNG GIRL 115 

shows great tact, especially towards her children when they 
reach our age, and who does not laugh at me if I cry about 
something-not pain, but other things-like “Mums” does. 

One thing, which perhaps may seem rather fatuous, I have 
never forgiven her. It was on a day that I had to go to the 
dentist. Mummy and Margot were going to come with me, 
and agreed that I should take my bicycle. When we had finished at the dentist, and were outside again, Margot and 
Mummy told me that they were going into the town to look 
at something or buy something— I don't remember exactly 
what. I wanted to go, too, but was not allowed to, as I had 
my bicycle with me. Tears of rage sprang into my eyes, and 
Mummy and Margot began laughing at me. Then I became 
so furious that I stuck my tongue out at them in the street just 
as an old woman happened to pass by, who looked very 
shocked! I rode home on my bicycle, and I know I cried for a 
long time. 

It is queer that the wound that Mummy made then still 
bums, when I think of how angry I was that afternoon. 

The second is something that is very difficult to tell you, 
because it is about myself. 

Yesterday I read an article about blushing by Sis Heyster. 
This article might have been addressed to me personally. Although I don't blush very easily, the other things in it certainly all fit me. She writes roughly something like this— that a girl 
in the years of puberty becomes quiet within and begins to 
think about the wonders that are happening to her body. 

I experience that, too, and that is why I get the feeling lately of being embarrassed about Margot, Mummy, and Daddy. 
Funnily enough, Margot, who is much more shy than I am, 
isn't at all embarrassed. 

I think what is happening to me is so wonderful, and not 
only what can be seen on my body, but all that is taking place 
inside. I never discuss myself or any of these things with anybody; that is why I have to talk to myself about them. 

Each time I have a period— and that has only been three 
times-I have the feeling that in spite of all the pain, unpleasantness, and nastiness, I have a sweet secret, and that is 


why, although it is nothing but a nuisance to me in a way, I 
always long for the time that I shall feel that secret within me 
again. 

Sis Heyster also writes that girls of this age don't feel quite 
certain of themselves, and discover that they themselves are 
individuals with ideas, thoughts, and habits. After I came 
here, when I was just fourteen, I began to think about myself 
sooner than most girls, and to know that I am a “person.” 
Sometimes, when I lie in bed at night, I have a terrible desire 
to feel my breasts and to listen to the quiet rhythmic beat of 
my heart. 

I already had these kinds of feelings subconsciously before 
I came here, because I remember that once when I slept with 
a girl friend I had a strong desire to kiss her, and that I did 
do so. I could not help being terribly inquisitive over her 
body, for she had always kept it hidden from me. I asked her 
whether, as a proof of our friendship, we should feel one another's breasts, but she refused. I go into ecstasies every time 
I see the naked figure of a woman, such as Venus, for example. 
It strikes me as so wonderful and exquisite that I have difficulty in stopping the tears rolling down my cheeks. 

If only I had a girl friend! 

Yours, Anne 

Thursday , 6 January , 1944 

Dear Kitty, 

My longing to talk to someone became so intense that somehow or other I took it into my head to choose Peter. 

Sometimes if I’ve been upstairs into Peter s room during the 
day, it always struck me as very snug, but because Peter is so 
retiring and would never turn anyone out who became a 
nuisance, I never dared stay long, because I was afraid he 
might think me a bore. I tried to think of an excuse to stay in 
his room and get him talking, without it being too noticeable, 
and my chance came yesterday. Peter has a mania for crossword puzzles at the moment and hardly does anything else. I 

THE DIARY OF A YOUNG GIRL 117 

helped him with them and we soon sat opposite each other at 
his little table, he on the chair and me on the divan. 

It gave me a queer feeling each time I looked into his deep 
blue eyes, and he sat there with that mysterious laugh playing 
round his lips. I was able to read his inward thoughts. I could 
see on his face that look of helplessness and uncertainty as to 
how to behave, and, at the same time, a trace of his sense of 
manhood. I noticed his shy maimer and it made me feel very 
gentle; I couldn’t refrain from meeting those dark eyes again 
and again, and with my whole heart I almost beseeched him: 
oh, tell me, what is going on inside you, oh, can’t you look 
beyond this ridiculous chatter? 

But the evening passed and nothing happened, except that 
I told him about blushing-naturally not what I have written, 
but just so that he would become more sure of himself as he 
grew older. 

When I lay in bed and thought over the whole situation, 
I found it far from encouraging, and the idea that I should 
beg for Peter’s patronage was simply repellent. One can do a 
lot to satisfy one’s longings, which certainly sticks out in my 
case, for I have made up my mind to go and sit with Peter 
more often and to get him talking somehow or other. 

Whatever you do, don’t think I’m in love with Peter— not a 
bit of it! If die Van Daans had had a daughter instead of a 
son, I should have tried to make friends with her too. 

I woke at about five to seven this morning and knew at 
once, quite positively, what I had dreamed. I sat on a chair 
and opposite me sat Peter . . . Wessel. We were looking together at a book of drawings by Mary Bos. The dream was so 
vivid that I can still partly remember the drawings. But that 
was not all-the dream went on. Suddenly Peter’s eyes met 
mine and I looked into those fine, velvet brown eyes for a long 
time. Then Peter said very softly, “If I had only known, I 
would have come to you long before!” I turned around 
brusquely because the emotion was too much for me. And 
after that I felt a soft, and oh, such a cool kind cheek against 
mine and it felt so good, so good. . , , 

I awoke at this point, while I could still feel his cheek 


against mine and felt his brown eyes looking deep into my 
heart, so deep, that there he read how much I had loved him 
and how much I still love him. Tears sprang into my eyes once 
more, and I was very sad that I had lost him again, but at the 
same time glad because it made me feel quite certain that 
Peter was still the chosen one. 

It is strange that I should often see such vivid images in 
my dreams here. First I saw Grandma 1 so clearly one night 
that I could even distinguish her thick, soft, wrinkled velvety 
skin. Then Granny appeared as a guardian angel; then followed Lies, who seems to be a symbol to me of the sufferings 
of all my girl friends and all Jews. When I pray for her, I pray 
for all Jews and all those in need. And now Peter, my darling 
Peter— never before have I had such a clear picture of him in 
my mind. I don't need a photo of him, I can see him before 
my eyes, and oh, so welll 

Yours, Anne 

Friday , 7 January, 1944 

Dear Kitty, 

What a silly ass I am! I am quite forgetting that I have 
never told you the history of myself and all my boy friends. 

When I was quite small— I was even still at a kindergarten 
—I became attached to Karel Samson. He had lost his father, 
and he and his mother lived with an aunt. One of Karels 
cousins, Hobby, was a slender, good-looking dark boy, who 
aroused more admiration than the little, humorous fellow, 
Karel. But looks did not count with me and I was very fond of 
Karel for years. 

We used to he together a lot for quite a long time, but for 
the rest, my love was unretumed. 

Then Peter crossed my path, and in my childish way I really fell in love. He liked me very much, too, and we were inseparable for one whole summer. I can still remember us walking hand in hand through the streets together, he in a white 

Grandma Is grandmother on Father’s side. Granny on Mother’s side. 



cotton suit and me in a short summer dress. At the end of the 
summer holidays he went into the first form of the high school 
and I into the sixth form of the lower school. He used to meet 
me from school and, vice versa, I would meet him. Peter was a 
very good-looking boy, tall, handsome, and shm, with an 
earnest, calm, intelligent face. He had dark hair, and wonderful brown eyes, ruddy cheeks, and a pointed nose. I was mad 
about his laugh, above all, when he looked so mischievous and 
naughty! 

I went to the country for the holidays; when I returned, 
Peter had in the meantime moved, and a much older boy lived 
in the same house. He apparently drew Peter’s attention to 
the fact that I was a childish little imp, and Peter gave me up. 
I adored him so that I didn’t want to face the truth. I tried to 
hold on to him until it dawned on me that if I went on running after him I should soon get the name of being boy-mad. 
The years passed. Peter went around with girls of his own age 
and didn’t even think of saying “Hello” to me any more; but I 
couldn’t forget him. 

I went to the Jewish Secondary School. Lots of boys in our 
class were keen on me-I thought it was fun, felt honored, but 
was otherwise quite untouched. Then later on, Harry was 
mad about me, but, as I’ve already told you, I never fell in 
love again. 

There is a saying “Time heals all wounds,” and so it was 
with me. I imagined that I had forgotten Peter and that I 
didn’t like him a bit any more. The memory of him, however, 
lived so strongly in my subconscious mind that I admitted to 
myself sometimes I was jealous of the other girls, and that 
was why I didn’t like him any more. This morning I knew that 
nothing has changed; on the contrary, as I grew older and 
more mature my love grew with me. I can quite understand 
now that Peter thought me childish, and yet it still hurt that 
he had so completely forgotten me. His face was shown so 
clearly to me, and now I know that no one else could remain 
with me hke he does. 

I am completely upset by the dream. When Daddy kissed 
me this morning, I could have cried out: “Oh, if only you were 


Peter!" I think of him all the time and I keep repeating to myself the whole day, “Oh, Petel, darling, darling Petel . . . !” 

Who can help me now? I must live on and pray to God that 
He will let Peter cross my path when I come out of here, and 
that when he reads the love m my eyes he will say, “Oh, Anne, 
if I had only known, I would have come to you long before!" 

I saw my face in the mirror and it looks quite different. My 
eyes look so clear and deep, my cheeks are pink— which they 
haven’t been for weeks-my mouth is much softer; I look as if 
I am happy, and yet there is something so sad in my expression and my smile slips away from my lips as soon as it has 
come. I’m not happy, because I might know that Peter’s 
thoughts are not with me, and yet I still feel his wonderful 
eyes upon me and his cool soft cheek against mine. 

Oh, Petel, Petel, how will I ever free myself of your image? 
Wouldn’t any other in your place be a miserable substitute? 
I love you, and with such a great love that it can’t grow in 
my heart any more but has to leap out into the open and suddenly manifest itself in such a devastating way! 

A week ago, even yesterday, if anyone had asked me, 
“Which of your friends do you consider would be the most 
suitable to marry?" I would have answered, “I don’t know"; 
but now I would cry, “Petel, because I love him with all my 
heart and soul. I give myself completely!” But one thing, he 
may touch my face, but no more. 

Once, when we spoke about sex, Daddy told me that I 
couldn’t possibly understand the longing yet; I always knew 
that I did understand it and now I understand it fully. Nothing is so beloved to me now as he, my Petel. 

Yours, Anne 

Wednesday, 12 January, 1944 

Dear Kitty, 

Elli has been back a fortnight. Miep and Henk were away 
from their work for two days— they both had tummy upsets. 

I have a craze for dancing and ballet at the moment, and 

practice dance steps every evening diligently. I Lave made a 
supermodern dance frock from a light blue petticoat edged 
with lace belonging to Mansa. A ribbon is threaded through 
round the top and ties in a bow in the center, and a pink 
corded ribbon completes the creation. I tried in vain to convert my gym shoes into real ballet shoes. My stiff limbs are 
well on the way to becoming supple again like they used to 
be. One terrific exercise is to sit on the floor, hold a heel in 
each hand, and then lift both legs up in the air. I have to 
have a cushion under me, otherwise my poor little behind has 
a rough time. 

Everyone here is reading the book Cloudless Morn. Mummy 
thought it exceptionally good; there are a lot of youth problems in it. I thought to myself rather ironically: “Take a bit 
more trouble with your own young people first!” 

I believe Mummy thinks there could be no better relationship between parents and their children, and that no one 
could take a greater interest in their children s lives than she. 
But quite definitely she only looks at Margot, who I don't 
think ever had such problems and thoughts as I do. Still, I 
wouldn’t dream of pointing out to Mummy that, in the case 
of her daughters, it isn’t at all as she imagines, because she 
would be utterly amazed and wouldn’t know how to change 
anyway; I want to save her the unhappiness it would cause 
her, especially as I know that for me everything would remain 
the same anyway. 

Mummy certainly feels that Margot loves her much more 
than I do, but she thinks that this just goes in phases! Margot 
has grown so sweet; she seems quite different from what she 
used to be, isn’t nearly so catty these days and is becoming a 
real friend. Nor does she any longer regard me as a little kid 
who counts for nothing. 

I have an odd way of sometimes, as it were, being able to 
see myself through someone else’s eyes. Then I view the affairs 
of a certain “Anne” at my ease, and browse through the pages 
of her life as if she were a stranger. Before we came here, 
when I didn’t think about things as much as I do now, I used 
at times to have the feeling that I didn’t belong to Mansa, 


Pim, and Margot, and that I would always be a bit of an outsider. Sometimes I used to pretend I was an orphan, until I 
reproached and punished myself, telling myself it was all my 
own fault that I played this self-pitying role, when I was really so fortunate. Then came the time that I used to force myself to be friendly. Every morning, as soon as someone came 
downstairs I hoped that it would be Mummy who would say 
good morning to me; I greeted her warmly, because I really 
longed for her to look lovingly at me. Then she made some remark or other that seemed unfriendly, and I would go off to 
school again feeling thoroughly disheartened. On the way 
home I would make excuses for her because she had so many 
worries, arrive home very cheerful, chatter nineteen to the 
dozen, until I began repeating myself, and left the room wearing a pensive expression, my satchel under my arm. Sometimes I decided to remain cross, but when I came home from 
school I always had so much news that my resolutions were 
gone with the wind and Mummy, whatever she might be doing, had to lend an ear to all my adventures. Then the time 
came once more when I didn’t listen for footsteps on the staircase any longer, and at night my pillow was wet with tears. 

Everything grew much worse at that point; enfin, you know 
all about it. 

Now God has sent me a helper— Peter ... I just clasp my 
pendant, kiss it, and think to myself, “What do I care about 
the lot of them! Peter belongs to me and no one knows anything about it.” This way I can get over all the snubs I receive. Who would ever think that so much can go on in the 
soul of a young girl? 

Yours, Anne 

Saturday , 15 January, 1944 

Dear Kitty, 

There is no point in telling you every time the exact details 
of our rows and arguments. Let it suffice to tell you that we 
have divided up a great many things, such as butter and meat, 

and that we fry our own potatoes. For some time now we've 
been eatmg whole-meal bread between meals as an extra, because by four o’clock m the afternoon we are longing for our 
supper so much that we hardly know how to control our rumbling tummies. 

Mummy’s birthday is rapidly approaching. She got some 
extra sugar from Kraler, which made the Van Daans jealous as 
Mrs. Van Daan had not been favored in this way for her birthday. But what’s the use of annoying each other with yet more 
unkind words, tears, and angry outbursts. You can be sure of 
one thing, Kitty, that we are even more fed up with them than 
ever 1 Mummy has expressed the wish— one which cannot come 
true just now-not to see the Van Daans for a fortnight. 

I keep asking myself, whether one would have trouble in 
the long run, whoever one shared a house with. Or did we 
strike it extra unlucky? Are most people so selfish and stingy 
then? I think it’s all to the good to have learned a bit about 
human beings, but now I think I’ve learned enough. The war 
goes on just the same, whether or not we choose to quarrel, or 
long for freedom and fresh air, and so we should try to make 
the best of our stay here. Now I’m preaching, but I also believe that if I stay here for very long I shall grow into a driedup old beanstalk. And I did so want to grow mto a real young 
womanl 

Yours, Anne 

Saturday , 22 January, 1944 

Dear Kitty, 

I wonder whether you can tell me why it is that people always try so hard to hide their real feelings? How is it that I 
always behave quite differently from what I should in other 
people’s company? 

Why do we trust one another so little? I know there must be 
a reason, but still 1 sometimes think it’s horrible that you find 
you can never really confide in people, even in those who are 
nearest to you. 


It seems as if I’ve grown up a lot since my dream the other 
night. I’m much more of an “independent being.” You’ll certainly be amazed when I tell you that even my attitude towards the Van Daans has changed. I suddenly see all the 
arguments and the rest of it in a different light, and am not as 
prejudiced as I was. 

How can I have changed so much? Yes, you see it suddenly 
struck me that if Mummy had been different, a real Mumsie, 
the relationship might have been quite, quite different. It’s 
true that Mrs. Van Daan is by no means a nice person, but still 
I do think that half the quarrels could be avoided if it weren’t 
for the fact that when the conversation gets tricky Mummy is 
a bit difficult too. 

Mrs. Van Daan has one good side, and that is that you can 
talk to her. Despite all her selfishness, stinginess, and underhandedness, you can make her give in easily, as long as you 
don’t irritate her and get on the wrong side of her. This way 
doesn’t work every time, but if you have patience you can try 
again and see how far you get. 

All the problems of our “upbringing,” of our being spoiled, 
the food— it could have been quite different if we’d remain 
perfectly open and friendly, and not always only -on the lookout for something to seize on. 

I know exactly what you’ll say, Kitty: “But, Anne, do these 
words really come from your lips? From you, who have had to 
listen to so many harsh words from the people upstairs, from 
you, the girl who has suffered so many injustices?” And yet 
they come from me. 

I want to start afresh and try to get to the bottom of it all, 
not be like the saying “the young always follow a bad example.” I want to examine the whole matter carefully myself and 
find out what is true and what is exaggerated. Then if I myself am disappointed in them, I can adopt the same line as 
Mummy and Daddy; if not, I shall try first of all to make them 
alter their ideas and if I don’t succeed I shall stick to my own 
opinions and judgment I shall seize every opportunity to discuss openly all our points of argument with Mrs. Van Daan 
and not be afraid of declaring myself neutral, even at the cost 

of being called a “know-all.” It is not that I shall be going 
against my own family, but from today there will be no more 
unkind gossip on my part. 

Until now I was immovable! I always thought the Van 
Daans were in the wrong, but we too are partly to blame We 
have certainly been right over the subject matter; but handling of others from intelligent people (which we consider 
ourselves to be!) one expects more insight. I hope that I have 
acquired a bit of insight and will use it well when the occasion 
arises. 

Yours, Anne 

Monday , 24 January , 1944 

Dear Kitty, 

Something has happened to me; or rather, I can hardly describe it as an event, except that I think it is pretty crazy. 
Whenever anyone used to speak of sexual problems at home 
or at school, it was something either mysterious or revolting. 
Woids which had any bearing on the subject were whispered, 
and often if someone didn’t understand he was laughed at. It 
struck me as very odd and I thought, “Why are people so 
secretive and tiresome when they talk about these things?” 
Rut as I didn’t think that I could change things, I kept my 
mouth shut as much as possible, or sometimes asked girl 
friends for information. When I had learned quite a lot and 
had also spoken about it with my parents, Mummy said one 
day, “Anne, let me give you some good advice; never speak 
about this subject to boys and don’t reply if they begin about 
it.” I remember exactly what my answer was: I said, “No, of 
course not! The very idea!” And there it remained. 

When we first came here, Daddy often told me about things 
that I would really have preferred to hear from Mummy, and 
I found out the rest from books and things I picked up from 
conversations. Peter Van Daan was never as tiresome over 
this as the boys at school— once or twice at first perhaps— but 
he never tried to get me talking. 


Mrs. Van Daan told us that she had never talked about 
these things to Peter, and for all she knew neither had her 
husband. Apparently she didn’t even know how much he 
knew. 

Yesterday, when Margot, Peter, and I were peeling potatoes, somehow the conversation turned to Boche. “We still 
don’t know what sex Boche is, do we?” I asked. 

“Yes, certainly,” Peter answered. “He’s a tom.” 

I began to laugh. “A tomcat that’s expecting, that’s marvelous!” 

Peter and Margot laughed too over this silly mistake. You 
see, two months ago, Peter had stated that Boche would soon 
be having a family, her tummy was growing visibly. However, 
the fatness appeared to come from the many stolen bones, 
because the children didn’t seem to grow fast, let alone make 
their appearance! 

Peter just had to defend himself. “No,” he said, “you can 
go with me yourself to look at him. Once when I was playing 
around with him, I noticed quite clearly that he’s a tom.” 

I couldn’t control my curiosity, and went with him to the 
warehouse. Boche, however, was not receiving visitors, and 
was nowhere to be seen. We waited for a while, began to get 
cold, and went upstairs again. Later in the afternoon I heard 
Peter go downstairs for the second time. I mustered up all my 
courage to walk through the silent house alone, and reached 
the warehouse. Boche stood on the packing table playing with 
Peter, who had just put him on the scales to weigh him. 

“Hello, do you want to see him?” He didn’t make any 
lengthy preparations, but picked up the animal, turned him 
over on to his back, deftly held his head and paws together, 
and the lesson began. “These are the male organs, these are 
just a few stray hairs, and that is his bottom.” The cat did 
another half turn and was standing on his white socks once 
more. 

If any other boy had shown me “the male organs,” I would 
never have looked at him again. But Peter went on talking 
quite normally on what is otherwise such a painful subject, 
without meaning anything unpleasant, and finally put me 

sufficiently at my ease for me to be normal too. We played 
with Boche, amused ourselves, chattered together, and then 
sauntered through the large warehouse towaids the door. 

“Usually, when I want to know something, I find it in some 
book or other, don t you?” I asked. 

“Why on earth? I just ask upstairs. My father knows more 
than me and has had more experience in such things.” 

We were already on the stair, so I kept my mouth shut after 
that. 

“Things may alter,” as Brer Rabbit said Yes. Really I 
shouldn’t have discussed these things in such a normal way 
with a girl. I know too definitely that Mummy didn’t mean it 
that way when she warned me not to discuss the subject with 
boys. I wasn’t quite my usual self for the rest of the day 
though, in spite of everything. When I thought over our talk, 
it still seemed rather odd. But at least I’m wiser about one 
thing, that there really are young people-and of the opposite 
sex too-who can discuss these things naturally without making fun of them. 

I wonder if Peter really does ask his parents much. Would 
he honestly behave with them as he did with me yesterday? 
Ah, what would I know about it! 

Yours, Anne 

Thursday , 27 January , 1944 

Dear Kitty, 

Lately I have developed a great love for family trees and 
genealogical tables of the royal families, and have come to the 
conclusion that, once you begin, you want to delve still deeper 
into the past, and can keep on making fresh and interesting 
discoveries. Although I am extraordinarily industrious over my 
lessons, and can already follow the English Home Service 
quite well on the wireless, I still devote many Sundays to sorting and looking over my large collection of film stars, which is 
quite a respectable size by now. 

I am awfully pleased whenever Mr. Kraler brings the 


Cinema and Theater with him on Mondays. Although this 
little gift is often called a waste of money by the less worldly 
members of the household, they are amazed each time at how 
accurately I can state who is in a certain film, even after a 
year. Elk, who, on her days off, often goes to the movies with 
her boy friend, tells me the titles of the new films each week; 
and in one breath I rattle off the names of the stars who appear m them, together with what the reviews say. Not so long 
ago, Mum said that I wouldn't need to go to a cinema later on 
because I knew the plots, the names of the stars, and the 
opinions of the reviews all by heart. 

If ever I come sailing in with a new hair style, they all look 
disapprovingly at me, and I can be quite sure that someone 
will ask which glamorous star I’m supposed to be imitating. 
They only half beheve me if I reply that it's my own invention. 

But to continue about the hair style — it doesn't stay put for 
more than half an hour; then I’m so tired of the remarks people pass that I quickly hasten to the bathroom and restore my 
ordinary house-garden-kitchen hair style. 

Yours, Anne 

Friday , 28 January, 1944 

Dear Kitty, 

I asked myself this morning whether you don’t sometimes 
feel rather like a cow who has had to chew over all the old 
pieces of news again and agam, and who finally yawns loudly 
and silently wishes that Anne would occasionally dig up something new. 

Alas, I know it’s dull for you, but try to put yourself in my 
place, and imagine how sick I am of the old cows who keep 
having to be pulled out of the ditch again. If the conversation 
at mealtimes isn’t over politics or a delicious meal, then Mummy or Mrs. Van Daan trot out one of the old stories of their 
youth, which we’ve heard so many times before; or Dussel 
twaddles on about his wife’s extensive wardrobe, beautiful 
race horses, leaking rowboats, boys who can swim at the age 

of four, muscular pams and nervous patients. What it all boils 
down to is this- that if one of the eight of us opens his mouth, 
the other seven can finish the story for him! We all know the 
point of every joke from the start, and the storyteller is alone 
in laughing at his witticisms The various milkmen, grocers, 
and butchers of the two ex-housewives have already grown 
beards in our minds, so often have they been praised to the 
skies or pulled to pieces; it is impossible for anything in the 
conversation here to be fresh or new 

Still, all this would be bearable if the grownups didn’t have 
their little way of telling the stories, with which Koophuis, 
Henk, or Miep oblige the company, ten times over and adding 
their own little frills and furbelows, so that I often have to 
pinch my arm under the table to prevent myself from putting 
them right. Little children such as Anne must never, under 
any circumstances, know better than the grownups, however 
many blunders they make, and to whatever extent they allow 
their imaginations to run away with them. 

One favorite subject of Koophuis’s and Henk’s is that of 
people in hiding and in the underground movement. They 
know very well that anything to do with other people in hiding interests us tremendously, and how deeply we can sympathize with the sufferings of people who get taken away, and 
rejoice with the liberated prisoner. 

We are quite as used to the idea of going into hiding, or 
“underground,” as in bygone days one was used to Daddy’s 
bedioom slippers warming in front of the fire. 

There are a great number of organizations, such as “The 
Free Netherlands,” which forge identity cards, supply money 
to people “undergiound,” find hiding places for people, and 
work for young men in hiding, and it is amazing how much 
noble, unselfish work these people are doing, risking their own 
hves to help and save others. Our helpers are a very good example They have pulled us thiough up till now and we hope 
they will bring us safely to dry land. Otherwise, they will have 
to shaie the same fate as the many others who are being 
searched for. Never have we heard one word of the burden 


which we certainly must be to them, never has one of them 
complained of all the trouble we give. 

They all come upstairs every day, talk to the men about 
business and politics, to the women about food and wartime 
difficulties, and about newspapers and books with the children. They put on the brightest possible faces, bring flowers 
and presents for birthdays and bank holidays, are always 
ready to help and do all they can. That is something we must 
never forget; although others may show heroism in the war or 
against the Germans, our helpers display heroism in their 
cheerfulness and affection. 

The wildest tales are going around, but still they are usually 
founded on fact. For instance, Koophuis told us this week 
that in Gelderland two football elevens met, and one side consisted solely of members of the “underground” and the other 
was made up of members of the police. New ration books are 
being handed out in Hilversum. In order that the many people in hiding may also draw rations, the officials have given instructions to those of them in the district to come at a certam 
time, so that they can collect their documents from a separate 
little table Still, they’ll have to be careful that such impudent 
tricks do not reach the ears of the Germans. 

Yours, Anne 

Thursday, 3 February, 1944 

Dear Kitty, 

Invasion fever in the country is mounting daily. If you were 
here, on the one hand, you would probably feel the effect of 
all these preparations just as I do and, on the other, you would 
laugh at us for making such a fuss-who knows— perhaps for 
nothing. 

All the newspapers are full of the invasion and are driving 
people mad by saying that “In the event of the English landing in Holland, the Germans will do all they can to defend 
the country, if necessary they will resort to flooding.” With 
this, maps have been published, on which the parts of Holland 



that will be under water are marked. As this applies to large 
parts of Amsterdam, the first question was, what shall we do 
if the water in the streets rises to one meter? The answers 
given by diffeient people vary considerably. 

“As walking or cycling is out of the question, we shall have 
to wade through the stagnant water.” 

“Of course not, one will have to try and swim. We shall all 
put on our bathing suits and caps and swim under water as 
much as possible, then no one will see that we are Jews.” 

“Oh, what nonsense! I’d like to see the ladies swimming, if 
the rats started biting their legs!” (That was naturally a man: 
just see who screams the loudest!) 

“We shan’t be able to get out of the house anyway; the 
warehouse will definitely collapse if there is a flood, it is so 
wobbly already.” 

“Listen, folks, all joking apart, we shall try and get a boat.” 

“Why bother? I know something much better. We each get 
hold of a wooden packing case from the attic and row with a 
soup ladle!” 

“I shall walk on stilts: I used to be an expert at it in my 
youth ” 

“Henk Van Santen won’t need to, he’s sure to take his wife 
on his back, then she’ll be on stilts ” 

This gives you a rough idea, doesn’t it, Kit? 

This chatter is all very amusing, but the truth may be otherwise. A second question about the invasion was bound to 
arise what do we do if the Germans evacuate Amsterdam? 

“Leave the city too, and disguise ourselves as best we can.” 

“Don’t go, whatever happens, stay put! The only thing to 
do is to remain here! The Germans are quite capable of driving the whole population right into Germany, where they will 
all die.” 

“Yes, naturally, we shall stay here, since this is the safest 
place Well try and fetch Koophuis and his family over here 
to come and live with us Well try and get hold of a sack of 
wood wool, then we can sleep on the floor. Let’s ask Miep 
and Koophuis to start bringing blankets here.” 

“Well order some extra corn in addition to our sixty 


pounds. Let’s get Henk to try and obtain more peas and 
beans, we have about sixty pounds of beans and ten pounds 
of peas m the house at present. Don’t forget that we’ve got 
fifty tins of vegetables.” 

“Mummy, just count up how much we’ve got of other food, 
will you?” 

“Ten tins of fish, forty tins of milk, ten kilos of milk powder, 
three bottles of salad oil, four preservmg jars of butter, four 
ditto of meat, two wicker-covered bottles of strawberries, two 
bottles of raspberries, twenty bottles of tomatoes, ten pounds 
of rolled oats, eight pounds of rice; and that’s all. 

“Our stock’s not too bad, but if you think that we may be 
having visitors as well and drawing from reserves each week, 
then it seems more than it actually is. We have sufficient coal 
and firewood in the house, also candles. Let’s all make little 
moneybags, which could easily be hidden in our clothing, in 
case we want to take money with us. 

“We’ll make lists of the most important things to take, 
should we have to run for it, and pack rucksacks now m readiness. If it gets that far, well put two people on watch, one in 
the front and one in the back loft. I say, what’s the use of collecting such stocks of food, if we haven’t any water, gas, or 
electricity?” 

“Then we must cook on the stove. Filter and boil our water. 
We’ll clean out some large wicker bottles and store water m 
them.” 

I hear nothing but this sort of talk the whole day long, invasion and nothing but invasion, arguments about suffering 
from hunger, dying, bombs, fire extinguishers, sleepmg bags, 
Jewish vouchers, poisonous gases, etc., etc. None of it is exactly cheering. The gentlemen m the “Secret Annexe” give 
pretty straightforward warnings; an example is the following 
conversation with Henk: 

“Secret Annexe”: “We are afraid that if the Germans withdraw, they will take the whole population with them.” 

Henk: ‘“That is impossible, they haven’t the trains at their 
disposal.” 

“S A.”.* “Trains? Do you really think they’d put civilians in 

carriages? Out of the question. They could use ‘shank's 
mare.' " (Per pedes apostolorum, Dussel always says. ) 

H.: “I don't believe a word of it, you look on the black 
side of everything What would be their object in driving all 
the civilians along with them?" 

“S A.": “Didn’t you know that Goebbels said, If we have 
to withdraw, we shall slam the doors of all the occupied 
countries behmd us'?" 

H.. “They have said so much already.” 

“S.A.": “Do you think the Germans are above doing such 
a thing or too humane? What they think is this. If we have 
got to go down, then everybody m our clutches will go down 
with us.”’ 

H.: “Tell that to the Marines; I just don’t believe it!" 

“S.A.”: “It’s always the same song; no one will see danger 
approaching until it is actually on top of him." 

H : “But you know nothing definite; you just simply suppose ” 

“$ A “We have all been through it ourselves, first in 
Germany, and then here. And what is going on in Russia?” 

H . “You mustn’t mclude the Jews. I don’t think anyone 
knows what is going on in Russia The English and the Russians are sure to exaggerate things for propaganda purposes, 
just like the Germans " 

“S.A.": “Out of the question, the English have always told 
the truth over the wireless. And suppose they do exaggerate 
the news, the facts are bad enough anyway, because you can’t 
deny that many millions of peace-loving people were just 
simply muidered or gassed in Poland and Russia" 

I will spare you further examples of these conversations; I 
myself keep very quiet and don't take any notice of all the 
fuss and excitement. I have now reached the stage that I 
don’t care much whether I live or die. The world will still 
keep on turning without me; what is going to happen, 
will happen, and anyway it’s no good trying to resist. 

I trust to luck and do nothing but work, hoping that all 
will end well. 

Yours, Anne 


Saturday , 12 February , 1944 

Dear Kitty, 

The sun is s hinin g, the sky is a deep blue, there is a lovely 
breeze and I’m longing-so longing~for everything. To talk, 
for freedom, for friends, to be alone. And I do so long ... to 
cry! I feel as if I’m going to burst, and I know that it would 
get better with crying; but I can’t, I’m restless, I go from one 
room to the other, breathe through the crack of a closed window, feel my heart beating, as if it is saying, “Can’t you satisfy 
my longings at last?” 

I believe that it’s spring within me, I feel that spring is 
awakening, I feel it in my whole body and soul. It is an effort 
to behave normally, I feel utterly confused, don’t know what 
to read, what to write, what to do, I only know that I am longing ... 1 

Yours, Anne 

Sunday, 13 February, 1944 

Dear Kitty, 

Since Saturday a lot has changed for me. It came about like 
this. I Ionged-and am still longing— but . . . now something 
has happened, which has made it a little, just a little, less. 

To my great joy— I will be quite honest about it— already 
this morning I noticed that Peter kept looking at me all the 
time. Not in the ordinary way, I don’t know how, I just can’t 
explain. 

I used to think that Peter was in love with Margot, but yesterday I suddenly had the feeling that it is not so. I made a 
special effort not to look at him too much, because whenever 
I did, he kept on looking too and then-yes, then-it gave me a 
lovely feeling inside, but which I mustn’t feel too often. 

I desperately want to be alone. Daddy has noticed that I’m 
not quite my usual self, but I really can’t tell him everything. 
“Leave me in peace, leave me alone,” that’s what I’d like to 

keep crying out all the time. Who knows, the day may come 
when I’m left alone more than I would wish! 

Yours, Anne 

Monday , 14 February , 1944 

Dear Kitty, 

On Sunday evening everyone except Pirn and me was sitting beside the wireless in order to listen to the ‘Immortal 
Music of the German Masters.” Dussel fiddled with the knobs 
continually. This annoyed Peter, and the others too. After restraining himself for half an hour, Peter asked somewhat irritably if the twisting and turning might stop. Dussel answered 
in his most hoity-toity manner, Tm getting it all right.” Peter 
became angry, was rude, Mr. Van Daan took his side, and 
Dussel had to give in. That was all. 

The reason in itself was very unimportant, but Peter seems 
to have taken it very much to heart. In any case, when I was 
rummaging about in the bookcase in the attic, he came up to 
me and began telhng me the whole story. I didn’t know anything about it, but Peter soon saw that he had found an attentive ear and got fairly into his stride. 

“Yes, and you see,” he said, “I don’t easily say anything, 
because I know beforehand that I’ll only become tongue-tied. 
I begin to stutter, blush, and twist around what I want to say, 
until I have to break off because I simply can’t find the words. 
That’s what happened yesterday, I wanted to say something 
quite different, but once I had started, I got m a hopeless 
muddle and that’s frightful. I used to have a bad habit; I wish 
I still had it now. If I was angry with anyone, rather than 
argue it out I would get to work on him with my fists. I quite 
realize that this method doesn’t get me anywhere; and that is 
why I admire you. You are never at a loss for a word, you say 
exactly what you want to say to people and are never the least 
bit shy.” 

“I can tell you, you’re making a big mistake,” I answered. 
“I usually say things quite differently from the way I meant to 


say them, and then I talk too much and far too long, and that’s 
just as bad.” 

I couldn’t help laughing to myself over this last sentence. 
However, I wanted to let him go on talking about himself, so 
I kept my amusement to myself, went and sat on a cushion on 
the floor, put my arms around my bent knees, and looked at 
him attentively. 

I am very glad that there is someone else in the house who 
can get into the same fits of rage as I get into I could see it 
did Peter good to pull Dussel to pieces to his heart’s content, 
without fear of my telling tales. And as for me, I was very 
pleased, because I sensed a real feeling of fellowship, such as 
I can only remember having had with my girl friends. 

Yours, Anne 

Wednesday, 16 February, 1944 

Dear Kitty, 

It’s Margot’s birthdav. Peter came at half past twelve to 
look at the presents and stayed talking much longer than was 
strictly necessary— a thing he’d have never done otherwise In 
the afternoon I went to get some coffee and, after that, potatoes, because I wanted to spoil Mai got for ]ust that one day m 
the year I went through Peter’s room; he took all his papers 
off the stairs at once and I asked whether I should close the 
trap door to the attic. “Yes,” he replied, “knock when you 
come back, then I’ll open it for you ” 

I thanked him, went upstairs, and searched at least ten minutes in the large barrel for the smallest potatoes Then my 
back began to ache and I got cold Naturally I didn’t knock, 
but opened the trap door myself, but still he came to meet me 
most obligingly, and took the pan from me. 

“I’ve looked for a long time, these are the smallest I could 
find,” I said. 

“Did you look in the big barrel?” 

“Yes, I’ve been over them all.” 

By this time I was standing at the bottom of the stairs and 



he looked searchingly in the pan which he was still holding. 
“Oh, but these are first-rate,” he said, and added when I took 
the pan from him, “I congratulate you!” At the same time he 
gave me such a gentle warm look which made a tender glow 
within me. I could really see that he wanted to please me, and 
because he couldn’t make a long complimentary speech he 
spoke with his eyes. I understood him, oh, so well, and was 
very grateful. It gives me pleasure even now when I recall 
those words and that look he gave me. 

When I went downstairs, Mummy said that I must get some 
more potatoes, this time for supper. I willingly offered to go 
upstairs again. 

When I came into Peter’s room, I apologized at having to 
disturb him again. When I was already on the stairs he got 
up, and went and stood between the door and the wall, firmly 
took hold of my arm, and wanted to hold me back by force. 

Til go,” he said. I rephed that it really wasn’t necessary 
and that I didn’t have to get particularly small ones this time. 
Then he was convinced and let my arm go. On the way down, 
he came and opened the trap door and took the pan again. 
When I reached the door, I asked, “What are you doing?” 
“French,” he replied. I asked if I might glance through the 
exercises, washed my hands, and went and sat on the divan 
opposite him. 

We soon began talking, after I’d explained some of the 
French to him. He told me that he wanted to go to the Dutch 
East Indies and live on a plantation later on. He talked about 
his home life, about the black market, and then he said that 
he felt so useless. I told him that he certainly had a very strong 
inferiority complex. He talked about the Jews. He would have 
found it much easier if he’d been a Christian and if he could 
be one after the war. I asked if he wanted to be baptized, but 
that wasn’t the case either. Who was to know whether he was 
a Jew when the war was over? he said. 

This gave me rather a pang; it seems such a pity that there’s 
always just a tinge of dishonesty about him. For the rest we 
chatted very pleasantly about Daddy, and about judging peo» 


pies characters and all kinds of things, I can’t remember 
exactly what now. 

It was half past four by the time I left. * 

In the evening he said something else that I thought was 
nice. We were talking about a picture of a film star that I’d 
given him once, which has now been hanging in his room for 
at least a year and a half He liked it very much and I offered 
to give him a few more sometime “No,” he replied, “I’d lather 
leave it like this. I look at these every day and they have 
grown to be my fnends.” 

Now I understand more why he always hugs Mouschi. He 
needs some affection, too, of course. 

I’d forgotten something else that he talked about. He said, 
“I don’t know what fear is, except when I think of my own 
shortcomings. But I’m getting over that too ” 

Peter has a terrible inferiority complex. For instance, he 
always thinks that he is so stupid, and we are so clever. If I 
help him with his French, he thanks me a thousand times. 
One day I shall turn around and say “Oh, shut up, you’re 
much better at English and geography!” 

Yours, Anne 

Friday, 18 Fehruaiy , 1944 

Dear Kitty, 

Whenever I go upstairs now I keep on hoping that I shall 
see “him.” Because my life now has an object, and I have 
something to look forward to, everything has become more 
pleasant. 

At least the object of my feelings is always there, and I 
needn’t be afraid of rivals, except Margot Don’t think I’m 
in love, because I’m not, but I do have the feeling all the time 
that something fine can grow up between us, something that 
gives confidence and friendship. If I get half a chance, I go 
up to him now. It’s not like it used to be when he didn't know 
how to begin. It’s just the opposite-he’s still talking when I’m 
half out of the room. 

Mummy doesn’t like it much, and always says I’ll be a 
nuisance and that I must leave him in peace. Honestly, 
doesn’t she realize that I’ve got some intuition? She looks at 
me so queerly every time I go into Peter’s little room. If I 
come downstairs from there, she asks me where I’ve been. I 
simply can’t bear it, and think it’s horrible. 

Yours, Anne 

Saturday, 19 February, 1944 

Dear Kitty, 

It is Saturday again and that really speaks for itself. 

The morning was quiet. I helped a bit upstairs, but I didn’t 
have more than a few fleeting words with “him.” At half past 
two, when everyone had gone to their own rooms, either to 
sleep or to read, I went to the private office, with my blanket 
and everything, to sit at the desk and read or write. It was 
not long before it all became too much for me, my head 
drooped on to my arm, and I sobbed my heart out. The tears 
streamed down my cheeks and I felt desperately unhappy. 
Oh, if only “he” had come to comfort me. It was four o’clock 
by the time I went upstairs again. I went for some potatoes, 
with fresh hope in my heart of a meeting, but while I was still 
smartening up my hair in the bathroom he went down to see 
Boche in the warehouse. 

Suddenly I felt the tears coming back and I hurried to the 
lavatory, quickly grabbing a pocket mirror as I passed. There 
I sat then, fully dressed, while the tears made dark spots on 
the red of my apron, and I felt very wretched. 

This is what was going through my mind. Oh, I’ll never 
reach Peter like this. Who knows, perhaps he doesn’t like me 
at all and doesn’t need anyone to confide in. Perhaps he only 
thinks about me in a casual sort of way. I shall have to go on 
alone once more, without friendship and without Peter. Perhaps soon I’ll be without hope, without comfort, or anything 
to look forward to again. Oh, if I could nestle my head against 
his shoulder and not feel so hopelessly alone and desertedl 


Who knows, perhaps he doesn’t care about me at all and 
looks at the others m just the same way Perhaps I only 
imagined that it was especially for me? Oh, Peter, if only you 
could see or hear me. If the truth were to prove as bad as that, 
it would be more than I could bear. 

However, a little later fresh hope and anticipation seemed 
to return, even though the tears were still streaming down 
my cheeks. 

Yours, Anne 

Wednesday, 23 February, 1944 

Dear Kitty, 

It’s lovely weather outside and I’ve quite perked up since 
yesterday. Nearly every morning I go to the attic where Peter 
works to blow the stuffy air out of my lungs From my favorite spot on the floor I look up at the blue sky and the bare 
chestnut tree, on whose branches little raindrops shine, appearing like silver, and at the seagulls and the other birds as 
they glide on the wind . 

He stood with his head against a thick beam, and I sat 
down. We breathed the fresh air, looked outside, and both 
felt that the spell should not be broken by words. We remained like this for a long time, and when he had to go up to 
the loft to chop wood, I knew that he was a nice fellow. He 
climbed the ladder, and I followed, then he chopped wood 
for about a quarter of an hour, during which time we still 
remained silent. I watched him from where I stood, he was 
obviously doing his best to show off his strength. But I looked 
out of the open window too, over a large area of Amsterdam, 
over all the roofs and on to the horizon, which was such a 
pale blue that it was hard to see the dividmg line. “As long as 
this exists,” I thought, “and I may live to see it, this sunshine, 
the cloudless skies, while this lasts, I cannot be unhappy.” 

The best remedy for those who are afraid, lonely, or unhappy is to go outside, somewhere where they can be quite 
alone with the heavens, nature, and God. Because only then 



does one feel that all is as it should be and that God wishes 
to see people happy, amidst the simple beauty of nature. As 
long as this exists, and it certainly always will, I know that 
then there will always be comfort for every sorrow, whatever 
the circumstances may be. And I firmly believe that nature 
brings solace in all troubles. 

Oh, who knows, perhaps it wont be long before I can share 
this overwhelming feeling of bliss with someone who feels 
the way I do about it. 

Yours, Anne 

A thought: 

We miss so much here, so very much and for so long now: 
I miss it too, just as you do. I’m not talking of outward things, 
for we are looked after m that way, no, I mean the inward 
things. Like you, I long for freedom and fresh air, but I believe now that we have ample compensation for our privations. I realized this quite suddenly when I sat in front of the 
window this morning. I mean inward compensation. 

When I looked outside right into the depth of Nature and 
God, then I was happy, really happy. And Peter, so long as I 
have that happiness here, the joy m nature, health and a lot 
more besides, all the while one has that, one can always recapture happiness. 

Riches can all be lost, but that happiness in your own heart 
can only be veiled, and it will still bring you happiness again, 
as long as you live. As long as you can look fearlessly up into 
the heavens, as long as you know that you are pure within 
and that you will still find happiness. 

Sunday , 27 February, 1944 

Dearest Kitty, 

From early in the morning till late at night, I really do 
hardly anything else but think of Peter. I sleep with his image 
before my eyes, dream about him and he is still looking at me 
when I awake. 


I Rave a strong feeling that Peter and I are really not so 
different as we would appear to be, and I will tell you why. 
We both lack a mother. His is too superficial, loves flirting 
and doesn’t trouble much about what he thinks. Mine does 
bother about me, but lacks sensitiveness, real motherliness. 

Peter and I both wrestle with our inner feelings, we are still 
uncertain and are really too sensitive to be roughly treated. 
If we are, then my reaction is to “get away from it all.” But as 
that is impossible, I hide my feelings, throw my weight about 
the place, am noisy and boisterous, so that everyone wishes 
that I was out of the way. 

He, on the contrary, shuts himself up, hardly talks at all, 
is quiet, day-dreams and in his way carefully conceals his true 
self. 

But how and when will we finally reach each other? I don’t 
know quite how long my common sense will keep this longing under control. 

Yours, Anne 

Monday , 28 February , 1944 

Dearest Kitty, 

It is becoming a bad dream-in daytime as well as at night. 
I see him nearly all the time and can’t get at him, I mustn’t 
show anything, must remain gay while I’m really in despair. 

Peter Wessel and Peter Van Daan have grown into one 
Peter, who is beloved and good, and for whom I long 
desperately. 

Mummy is tiresome, Daddy sweet and therefore all the 
more tiresome, Margot the most tiresome because she expects 
me to wear a pleasant expression; and all I want is to be left 
in peace. 

Peter didn’t come to me in the attic. He went up to the loft 
instead and did some carpentry. At every creak and every 
knock some of my courage seemed to seep away and I giew 
more unhappy. In the distance a bell was playing “Pure in 



body, pure in soul.” 1 I’m sentimental-I know. I’m desperate 
and silly-I know that too. Oh, help me! 

Yours, Anne 

Wednesday , 1 March , 1944 

Dear Kitty, 

My own affairs have been pushed into the background by 
-a burglary. I’m becoming boring with all my burglars, but 
what can I do, they seem to take such a delight in honoring 
Kolen & Co. with their visits. This burglary is much more 
complicated than the one in July 1943. 

When Mr. Van Daan went to Kraler s office at half past 
seven, as usual, he saw that the communicating glass doors 
and the office door were open. Surprised at this, he walked 
through and was even more amazed to see that the doors of 
the little dark room were open too, and that there was a terrible mess in the main office. “There has been a burglar,” he 
thought to himself at once, and to satisfy himself he went 
straight downstairs to look at the front door, felt the Yale 
lock, and found everything closed. “Oh, then both Peter and 
Elli must have been very slack this evening,” he decided. He 
remained in Kraler’s room for a while, then switched off the 
lamp, and went upstairs, without worrying much about either 
the open doors or the untidy office. 

This morning Peter knocked at our door early and came 
with the not so pleasant news that the front door was wide 
open. He also told us that the projector and Kraler’s new 
portfolio had both disappeared from the cupboard. Peter was 
told to close the door. Van Daan told us of his discoveries 
the previous evening and we were all awfully worried. 

What must have happened is that the thief had a skeleton 
key, because the lock was quite undamaged. He must have 
crept into the house quite early and closed the door behind 
him, hidden himself when disturbed by Mr. Van Daan, and 

l The bells in old dock towers play tunes. 



when he departed fled with his spoils, leaving the door open 
in his haste. Who can have our key? Why didn’t the thief go 
to the warehouse? Might it be one of our own warehousemen, and would he perhaps betray us, since he certainly 
heard Van Daan and perhaps even saw him? 

It is all very creepy, because we don’t know whether this 
same burglar may not take it into his head to visit us again. 
Or perhaps it gave him a shock to find that there was someone walking about in the house? 

Yours, Anne 

Thursday , 2 

Dear Kitty, 

Margot and I were both up in the attic today; although we 
were not able to enjoy it together as I had imagined, still I do 
know that she shares my feelings over most things. 

During dish washing Elli began telling Mummy and Mrs. 
Van Daan that she felt very discouraged at times. And what 
help do you think they gave her? Do you know what 
Mummy’s advice was? She should try to think of all the 
other people who are in trouble! What is the good of thinking of misery when one is already miserable oneself? I said 
this too and was told, “You keep out of this sort of conversation ” 

Aren’t the grownups idiotic and stupid? Just as if Peter, 
Margot, Elli, and I don’t all feel the same about things, and 
only a mother’s love or that of a very, very good friend can 
help us. These mothers here just don’t understand us at all. 
Perhaps Mrs. Van Daan does a little more than Mummy. Oh, 
I would have so liked to say something to poor Elli, something that I know from experience would have helped her. 
But Daddy came between us and pushed me aside. 

Aren’t they all stupid! We aren’t allowed to have any 
opinions. People can tell you to keep your mouth shut, but 
it doesn’t stop you having your own opinion. Even if people 
are still very young, they shouldn’t be prevented from saying 
what they think. 



Only great love and devotion can help Elli, Margot, Peter, 
and me, and none of us gets it. And no one, especially the 
stupid “know-alls” here, can understand us, because we are 
much more sensitive and much more advanced in our 
thoughts than anyone here would ever imagine m their wildest dreams. 

Mummy is grumbling again at the moment-she is obviously jealous because I talk more to Mrs. Van Daan than to 
her nowadays. 

I managed to get hold of Peter this afternoon and we talked 
for at least three quarters of an hour. Peter had the greatest 
difficulty in saying anything about himself, it took a long 
time to draw him out. He told me how often his parents 
quarrel over politics, cigarettes, and all kinds of things. He 
was very shy. 

Then I talked to him about my parents. He defended 
Daddy: he thought him a “first-rate chap.” Then we talked 
about “upstairs” and “downstairs” again; he was really rather 
amazed that we don’t always like his parents. “Peter,” I said, 
“you know Im always honest, so why shouldn’t I tell you 
that we can see their faults too.” And among other things I 
also said, “I would so like to help you, Peter; can’t I? You 
are in such an awkward position and, although you don’t 
say anything, it doesn’t mean that you don’t care.” 

“Oh, I would always welcome your help.” 

“Perhaps you would do better to go to Daddy, he wouldn’t 
let anything go any further, take it from me; you can easily 
tell him!” 

“Yes, he is a real pal.” 

“You’re very fond of him, aren’t you?” Peter nodded and 
I went on: “And he is of you tool” 

He looked up quickly and blushed, it was really moving 
to see how these few words pleased him. 

“Do you think so?” he asked. 

“Yes,” I said, “you can easily tell by little things that slip 
out now and then!” 

Peter is a first-rate chap, too, just like Daddy! 

Yours, Anne 



Friday , 3 March , 1944 

Deal Kitty, 

When I looked into the candle this evening 1 I felt calm 
and happy. Oma seems to be in the candle and it is Oma too 
who shelters and protects me and who always makes me feel 
happy again. 

Rut . . . there is someone else who governs all my moods 
and that is . . . Peter. When I went up' to get potatoes today 
and was still standing on the stepladder with the pan, he at 
once asked, “What have you been doing since lunch?” I 
went and sat on the steps and we started talking. At a quarter past five (an hour later) the potatoes, which had been 
sitting on the floor in the meantime, finally reached their 
destinations. 

Peter didn’t say another word about his parents; we just 
talked about books and about the past. The boy has such 
warmth in his eyes; I believe I’m pretty near to being in love 
with him. He talked about that this evening. I went into his 
room, after peeling the potatoes, and said that I felt so hot. 

“You can tell what the temperature is by Margot and me; 
if it’s cold we are white, and if it is hot we are red in the 
face,” I said. 

“In love' 5 ” he asked. 

“Why should I be m love?” My answer was rather silly. 

“Why not?” he said, and then we had to go for supper. 

Would he have meant anything by that question? I finally 
managed to ask him today whether he didn’t find my chatter 
a nuisance; he only said: “It’s okay, I like it!” 

To what extent this answer was just shyness, I am not able 
to judge. 

Kitty, I’m just like someone in love, who can only talk 
about her darling. And Peter really is a darling. When shall 
I be able to tell him so? Naturally, only if he thinks I’m a 
darling too. But I’m quite capable of looking after myself, 
and he knows that very well. And he likes his tranquillity, 
so I have no idea how much he likes me. In any case, we are 

Un Jewish homes candles are ht on the Sabbath eve. 



getting to know each other a bit. I wish we dared to tell each 
other much more already. Who knows, the time may come 
sooner than I think! I get an understanding look from him 
about twice a day, I wink back, and we both feel happy. 

I certainly seem quite mad to be talking about him being 
happy, and yet I feel pretty sure that he thinks just the same 
as I do. 

Yours, Anne 

Saturday , 4 March , 1944 

Dear Kitty, 

This is the first Saturday for months and months that 
hasn't been boring, dreary, and dull. And Peter is the cause. 

This morning I went to the attic to hang up my apron, 
when Daddy asked whether I'd like to stay and talk some 
French. I agreed. First we talked French, and I explained 
something to Peter; then we did some English. Daddy read 
out loud to us from Dickens and I was in the seventh heaven, 
because I sat on Daddy's chair very close to Peter. 

I went downstairs at eleven o'clock. When I came upstairs 
again at half past eleven, he was already waiting for me on 
the stairs. We talked until a quarter to one. If, as I leave the 
room, he gets a chance after a meal, for instance, and if 
no one can hear, he says: “Good-by, Anne, see you soon." 

Oh, I am so pleased! I wonder if he is going to fall in love 
with me after all? Anyway, he is a very nice fellow and no 
one knows what lovely talks I have with him! 

Mrs. Van Daan quite approves when I go and talk to him, 
but she asked today teasingly, “Can I really trust you two up 
there together?” 

“Of course,” I protested, “really you quite insult me!” 

From morn till night I look forward to seeing Peter. 

Yours, Anne 



Monday , 6 March , 1944 

Dear Kitty, 

I can tell by Peters face that be thinks just as much as I 
do, and when Mrs. Van Daan yesterday evening said scoffingiy; “The thinker!” I was irritated. Peter flushed and 
looked very embarrassed, and I was about to explode. 

Why can't these people keep their mouths shut? 

You can't imagine how horrible it is to stand by and see 
how lonely he is and yet not be able to do anything. I can 
so well imagine, just as if I were in his place, how desperate 
he must feel sometimes in quarrels and in love. Poor Peter, 
he needs love very much! 

When he said he didn't need any friends how harsh the 
words sounded to my ears. Oh, how mistaken he is! I don’t 
bebeve he meant it a bit. 

He clings to his solitude, to his affected indifference and his 
grown-up ways, but it’s just an act, so as never, never to show 
his real feelings. Poor Peter, how long will he be able to go 
on playing this role? Surely a terrible outburst must follow as 
the result of this superhuman effort? 

Oh, Peter, if only I could help you, if only you would let 
me 1 Together we could drive away your loneliness and mine! 

I think a lot, but I don’t say much. I am happy if I see 
him and if the sun shines when I’m with him. I was very 
excited yesterday; while I was washing my hair, I knew that 
he was sitting in the room next to ours. I couldn’t do anything about it; the more quiet and senous I feel inside, the 
more noisy I become outwardly. 

Who will be the first to discover and break through this 
armor? I’m glad after all that the Van Daans have a son 
and not a daughter, my conquest could never have been so 
difficult, so beautiful, so good, if I had not happened to hit 
on someone of the opposite sex. 

Yours, Anne 

P.S. You know that I’m always honest with you, so I must 
tell you that I actually live from one meeting to the next 



I keep hoping to discover that he too is waiting for me all 
the time and Im thrilled if I notice a small shy advance 
from his side. I believe he’d like to say a lot just like I would; 
little does he know that it’s just his clumsiness that attracts 
me. 

Yours, Anne 

Tuesday , 7 March, 1944 

Dear Kitty, 

If I think now of my life in 1942, it all seems so unreal. 
It was quite a different Anne who enjoyed that heavenly 
existence from the Anne who has grown wise within these 
walls. Yes, it was a heavenly life. Boy friends at every turn, 
about twenty friends and acquaintances of my own age, the 
darling of nearly all the teachers, spoiled from top to toe by 
Mummy and Daddy, lots of sweets, enough pocket money, 
what more could one want? 

You will certainly wonder by what means I got around all 
these people. Peter s word 4 attractiveness” is not altogether 
true. All Hie teachers were entertained by my cute answers, 
my amusing remarks, my smiling face, and my questioning 
looks. That is all I was— a terrible flirt, coquettish and amusing. I had one or two advantages, which kept me rather in 
favor. I was industrious, honest, and frank. I would never 
have dreamed of cribbing from anyone else. I shared my 
sweets generously, and I wasn’t conceited. 

Wouldn’t I have become rather forward with so much 
admiration? It was a good thing that in the midst of, at the 
height of, all this gaiety, I suddenly had to face reality, and 
it took me at least a year to get used to the fact that there 
was no more admiration forthcoming. 

How did I appear at school? The one who thought of new 
jokes and pranks, always “king of the castle,” never in a bad 
mood, never a crybaby. No wonder everyone liked to cycle 
with me, and I got their attentions. 

Now I look back at that Anne as an amusing, but very 



superficial girl, who has nothing to do with the Anne of 
today. Peter said quite rightly about me: “If ever I saw you, 
you were always surrounded by two or more boys and a 
whole troupe of girls. You were always laughing and always 
the center of everything!” 

What is left of this girl? Oh, don't worry, I haven't forgotten how to laugh or to answer back readily. I'm just as 
good, if not better, at criticizing people, and I can still flirt 
if ... I wish. That’s not it though, I’d like that sort of life 
again for an evening, a few days, or even a week, the life 
which seems so carefree and gay. But at the end of that 
week, I should be dead beat and would be only too thankful 
to listen to anyone who began to talk about something sensible. I don’t want followers, but friends, admirers who fall 
not for a flattering smile but for what one does and for one’s 
character. 

I know quite well that the circle around me would be 
much smaller. But what does that matter, as long as one still 
keeps a few sincere friends? 

Yet I wasn’t entirely happy in 1942 m spite of everything; 
I often felt deserted, but because I was on the go the whole 
day long, I didn’t think about it and enjoyed myself as much 
as I could. Consciously or unconsciously, I tried to drive 
away the emptiness I felt with jokes and pranks. Now I think 
seriously about life and what I have to do. One period of my 
life is over forever. The carefree schooldays are gone, never 
to return. 

I don’t even long for them any more; I have outgrown 
them, I can’t just only enjoy myself as my serious side is always there. 

I look upon my life up till the New Year, as it were, through 
a powerful magnifying glass. The sunny life at home, then 
coming here in 1942, the sudden change, the quarrels, the 
bickerings. I couldn’t understand it, I was taken by surprise, 
and the only way I could keep up some bearing was by being 
impertinent. 

The first half of 1943. my fits of crying, the loneliness, how 
I slowly began to see all my faults and shortcomings, which 



are so great and which seemed much greater then. During 
the day I deliberately talked about anything and everything 
that was farthest from my thoughts, tried to draw Pim to me; 
but couldn't. Alone I had to face the difficult task of changing myself, to stop the everlasting reproaches, which were so 
oppressive and which reduced me to such terrible despondency. 

Things improved slightly in the second half of the year, I 
became a young woman and was treated more like a grownup. 
I started to think, and write stories, and came to the conclusion that the others no longer had the right to throw 
me about like an india-rubber ball. I wanted to change in 
accordance with my own desires. But one thing that struck 
me even more was when I realized that even Daddy would 
never become my confidant over everything. I didn’t want to 
trust anyone but myself any more. 

At the beginning of the New Year: the second great 
change, my dream. . . . And with it I discovered my longing, 
not for a girl friend, but for a boy friend. I also discovered 
my inward happiness and my defensive armor of superficiality 
and gaiety. In due time I quieted down and discovered my 
boundless desire for all that is beautiful and good. 

And in the evening, when I lie in bed and end my prayers 
with the words, “I thank you, God, for all that is good and 
dear and beautiful,” I am filled with joy. Then I think about 
“the good” of going into hiding, of my health and with 
my whole being of the “dearness” of Peter, of that which 
is still embryonic and impressionable and which we neither 
of us dare to name or touch, of that which will come sometime; love, the future, happiness and of "the beauty” which 
exists in the world; the world, nature, beauty and all, all that 
is exquisite and fine. 

I don’t think then of all the misery, hut of the beauty that 
still remains. This is one of the things that Mummy and I 
are so entirely different about. Her counsel when one feels 
melancholy is: "Think of all the misery in the world and be 
thankful that you are not sharing in it!” My advice is: "Go 
outside, to the fields, enjoy nature and the sunshine, go out 
and try to recapture happiness in yourself and in God. Think 
of all the beauty that's still left in and around you and be 
happy!” 

I don’t see how Mummy’s idea can be right, because then 
how are you supposed to behave if you go through the misery 
yourself? Then you are lost. On the contrary, I’ve found 
that there is always some beauty left-in nature, sunshine, 
freedom, in yourself; these can all help you. Look at these 
things, then you find yourself again, and God, and then you 
regain your balance. 

And whoever is happy will make others happy too. He 
who has courage and faith will never perish in misery! 

Yours, Anne 

Sunday , 12 March , 1944 

Dear Kitty, 

I can’t seem to sit still lately; I run upstairs and down and 
then back again. I love talking to Peter, but Tm always 
afraid of being a nuisance. He has told me a bit about the 
past, about his parents and about himself. Its not half 
enough though and I ask myself why it is that I always long 
for more. He used to think I was unbearable; and I returned 
the compliment; now I have changed my opinion, has he 
changed his too? 

I think so; still it doesn’t necessarily mean that we shall 
become great friends, although as far as I am concerned it 
would make the time here much more bearable. But still, 
I won’t get myself upset about it— I see quite a lot of^him 
and there’s no need to make you unhappy about it too, Kitty, 
just because I feel so miserable. 

On Saturday afternoon I felt in such a whirl, after hearing 
a whole lot of sad news, that I went and lay on my divan for 
a sleep. I only wanted to sleep to stop myself thinking. I slept 
till four o’clock, then I had to go into the living room. I 
found it difficult to answer all Mummy’s questions and think 

of some little excuse to tell Daddy, as an explanation for 
my long sleep. I resorted to a “headache,” which wasn't a lie, 
as I had one . . . but insidel 

Ordinary people, ordinary girls, teen-agers like myself, will 
think fm a bit cracked with all my self-pity. Yes, that's 
what it is, but I pour out my heart to you, then for the rest 
of the day I’m as impudent, gay, and self-confident as I can 
be, in order to avoid questions and getting on my own nerves. 

Margot is very sweet and would like me to trust her, but 
still, I can't tell her everything. She's a darling, she's good 
and pretty, but she lacks the nonchalance for conducting 
deep discussions; she takes me so seriously, much too seriously, and then thinks about her queer little sister for a long 
time afterwards, looks searchingly at me, at every word I say, 
and keeps on thinking: “Is this just a joke or does she really 
mean it?” I think that's because we are together the whole 
day long, and that if I trusted someone completely, then 
I shouldn’t want them hanging around me all the time. 

When shall I finally untangle my thoughts, when shall I 
find peace and rest within myself again? 

Yours, Ann© 

Tuesday , 14 March , 1944 

Dear Kitty, 

Perhaps it would be entertaining for you— though not in 
the least for me-to hear what we are going to eat today. As 
the charwoman is at work downstairs. I'm sitting on the 
Van Daans' table at the moment. I have a handkerchief 
soaked m some good scent (bought before we came here) 
over my mouth and held against my nose. You won't gather 
much Rom this, so let's “begin at the beginning." 

The people from whom we obtained food coupons have 
been caught, so we just have our five ration cards and no 
extra coupons, and no fats. As both Miep and Koophuis are 
ill, Elli hasn’t time to do any shopping, so the atmosphere 
is dreary and dejected, and so is the food. From tomorrow 



we shall not have a scrap of fat, butter, or margarine left. We 
can't have fried potatoes (to save bread) for breakfast any 
longer, so we have porridge instead, and as Mrs. Van Daan 
thinks were starving, we have bought some full cream mflV 
“under the counter," Our supper today consists of a hash 
made from kale which has been preserved in a barrel. Hence 
the precautionary measure with the handkerchief! It's incredible how kale can stink when it's a year old! The smell 
in the room is a mixture of bad plums, strong preservatives, 
and rotten eggs. Ugh! the mere thought of eating that muck 
makes me feel sick. 

Added to this, our potatoes are suffering from such peculiar 
diseases that out of two buckets of pommes de terre , one 
whole one ends up on the stove. We amuse ourselves by 
searching for all the different kinds of diseases, and have 
come to the conclusion that they range from cancer and 
smallpox to measles! Oh, no, its no joke to be in hiding 
during the fourth year of the war. If only the whole rotten 
business was over! 

Quite honestly, I wouldn't care so much about the food, 
if only it were more pleasant here in other ways. There's the 
rub. this tedious existence is beginning to make us all touchy. 

The following are the views of the five grownups on the 
present situation: 

Mrs. Van Daan: “The job as queen of the kitchen lost its 
attraction a long time ago. It's dull to sit and do nothing, 
so I go back to my cooking again. Still, I have to complain 
that it’s impossible to cook without any fats, and all these 
nasty smells make me feel sick. Nothing but ingratitude and 
rude remarks do I get in return for my services. I am always 
the black sheep, always the guilty one. Moreover, according 
to me, very little progress is being made in the war, in the 
end the Germans will still win. I’m afraid were going to 
starve, and if I'm in a had mood I scold everyone." 

Mr. Van Daan: “I must smoke and smoke and smoke, and 
then the food, the political situation, and Kerli's moods 
don't seem so had. Kerli is a darling wife.” 

But if he hasn't anything to smoke, then nothing is right, 



and this is what one hears: Tm getting ill, we don’t live 
well enough, I must have meat. Frightfully stupid person, 
my Kerli!” After this a terrific quarrel is sure to follow. 

Mrs. Frank: "Food is not very important, but I would 
love a slice of rye bread now, I feel so terribly hungry. If I 
were Mrs. Van Daan I would have put a stop to Mr. Van 
Daan’s everlasting smoking a long time ago. But now I must 
definitely have a cigarette, because my nerves are getting 
the better of me. The English make a lot of mistakes, but 
still the war is progressing. I must have a chat and be thankful Im not in Poland” 

Mr. Frank. "Everything’s all right. I don’t require anything. Take it easy, we’ve ample time. Give me my potatoes 
and then I will keep my mouth shut. Put some of my rations 
on one side for Elli. The political situation is very promising, I’m extremely optimistic!” 

Mr. Dussel: "I must get my task for today, everything must 
be finished on time. Political situation ‘outschtanding’ and it 
is eempossible’ that we’ll be caught. 

“I, I, I ... 1” 

Yours, Anne 

Wednesday , 15 March , 1944 

Dear Kitty, 

Phew! Oh dear, oh dear-released from the somber scenes 
for a moment! Today I hear nothing but "if this or that 
should happen, then we are going to be in difficulties . . . 
if he or she should become ill, then we’ll be completely 
isolated, and then if . . .” Enfin, I expect you know the rest, 
at least I presume you know the "Secret Annexers” well 
enough by this time to be able to guess the trend of their 
conversations. 

The reason for all this "if, if” is that Mr. Kraler has been 
called up to go digging. Elli has a streaming cold and will 
probably have to stay at home tomorrow. Miep hasn’t fully 
recovered from her flu yet, and Koophuis has had such bad 

NANNE FRAK 156 

hemorrhage of the stomach that he lost consciousness. What 
a tale of woe! 

The warehouse people are getting a free day tomorrow; 
Elli can stay at home, then the door will remain locked 
and we shall have to be as quiet as mice, so that the neighbors don’t hear us. Henk is coming to visit the deserted ones 
at one o’clock-playing the role of zoo-keeper, as it were. 
For the first time in ages he told us something about the 
great wide world this afternoon. You should have seen the 
eight of us sitting around him; it looked exactly like a picture 
of grandmother telling a story. He talked nineteen to the 
dozen to his grateful audience about food, of course, and 
then Miep’s doctor, and everything that we asked about. 
“Doctor,” he said, “don’t talk to me about the doctor! I rang 
him up this morning, had his assistant on the phone and 
asked for a prescription for flu. The reply was that I could 
come and get the prescription any time between eight and 
nine in the morning. If you have a very bad attack of flu, 
the doctor comes to the telephone himself and says Tut out 
your tongue, say Aah, I can hear all right that your throat is 
inflamed. I’ll write out a prescription for you to order from 
the chemist. Good-by.’ And that’s that.” A fine practice that, 
run by telephone only. 

Rut I don’t want to criticize the doctors; after all, a person 
has but two hands, and in these days there’s an abundance of 
patients and very few doctors to cope with them. Still, we 
couldn’t help laughing when Henk repeated the telephone 
conversation to us. 

I can just imagine what a doctor’s waiting room must look 
like nowadays. One doesn’t look down on panel patients any 
more, but on the people with minor ailments, and thinks: “Hi, 
you, what are you doing here, end of the line, please; urgent 
cases have priority!” 

Yours, Anne 



Thursday , 16 March , 1944 

Dear Kitty, 

The weather is lovely, superb, I can’t describe it; I’m going 
up to the attic in a minute. 

Now I know why I’m so much more restless than Peter. He 
has his own room where he can work, dream, think, and sleep. 
I am shoved about from one corner to another. I hardly spend 
any time in my “double” room and yet it’s something I long 
for so much. That is the reason too why I so frequently escape 
to the attic. There, and with you, I can be myself for a while, 
just a little while. Still, I don’t want to moan about myself, on 
the contrary, I want to be brave. Thank goodness the others 
can’t tell what my inward feelings are, except that I’m growing cooler towards Mummy daily, I’m not so affectionate to 
Daddy and don’t tell Margot a single thing. I’m completely 
closed up. Above all, I must maintain my outward reserve, no 
one must know that war still reigns incessantly within. War 
between desire and common sense. The latter has won up till 
now; yet will the former prove to be the stronger of the two? 
Sometimes I fear that it will and sometimes I long for it to be! 

Oh, it is so terribly difficult never to say anything to Peter, 
but I know that the first to begm must be he; there’s so much 
I want to say and do, I’ve lived it all in my dreams, it is so 
hard to find that yet another day has gone by, and none of it 
comes true! Yes, Kitty, Anne is a crazy child, but I do live in 
crazy times and under still crazier circumstances. 

But, still, the brightest spot of all is that at least I can write 
down my thoughts and feelings, otherwise I would be absolutely stifled! I wonder what Peter thinks about all these 
things? I keep hoping that I can talk about it to him one day. 
There must be something he has guessed about me, because 
he certainly can’t love the outer Anne, which is the one he 
knows so far. 

How can he, who loves peace and quiet, have any liking for 
all my bustle and din? Can he possibly be the first and only 
one to have looked through my concrete armor? And will it 
take him long to get there? Isn’t there an old saying that love 



often springs from pity, or that the two go hand in hand? Is 
that the case with me too? Because I’m often just as sorry for 
him as I am for myself. 

I really don t honestly know how to begin, and however 
would he be able to, when he finds talking so much more difficult than I do? If only I could write to him, then at least I 
would know that he would grasp what I want to say, because 
its so terribly difficult to put it into words! 

Yours, Anne 

Friday , 17 March , 1944 

Dear Kitty, 

A sigh of relief has gone through the "Secret Annexe” Kraler has been exempted from digging by the Court. Elli has 
given her nose a talking to and strictly forbidden it to be a 
nuisance to her today. So everything is all right again, except 
that Margot and I are getting a bit tired of our parents. Don’t 
misunderstand me, I can’t get on well with Mummy at the 
moment, as you know. I still love Daddy just as much, and 
Margot loves Daddy and Mummy, but when you are as old as 
we are, you do want to decide just a few things for yourself, 
you want to be independent sometimes. 

If I go upstairs, then I’m asked what I’m going to do, I’m 
not allowed salt with my food, every evening regularly at a 
quarter past eight Mummy asks whether I ought not to start 
undressing, every book I read must be inspected. I must admit 
that they are not at all strict, and I’m allowed to read nearly 
everything, and yet we are both sick of all the remarks plus 
all the questioning that go on the whole day long. 

Something else, especially about me, that doesn’t please 
them: I don’t feel like giving lots of kisses any more and I 
think fancy nicknames are terribly affected. In short, I’d really 
like to be rid of them for a while. Margot said last evening, "I 
think it’s awfully annoying, the way they ask if you’ve got a 
headache, or whether you don’t feel well, if you happen to 
give a sigh and put your hand to your head!” 



It is a great blow to us both, suddenly to realize how little 
remains of the confidence and harmony that we used to have 
at home. And it’s largely due to the fact that were all “skewwiff” here. By this I mean that we are treated as children over 
outward things, and we are much older than most girls of our 
age inwardly. 

Although I’m only fourteen, I know quite well what I want, 
I know who is right and who is wrong, I have my opinions, 
my own ideas and principles, and although it may sound 
pretty mad from an adolescent, I feel more of a person than a 
child, I feel quite independent of anyone. 

I know that I can discuss things and argue better than 
Mummy, I know I’m not so prejudiced, I don’t exaggerate so 
much, I am more precise and adroit and because of this— you 
may laugh-I feel superior to her over a great many things. If 
I love anyone, above all I must have admiration for them, admiration and respect. Everything would be all right if only I 
had Peter, for I do admire him in many ways. He is such a 
nice, good-looking boy! 

Yours, Anne 

Sunday , 19 March , 1944 

Dear Kitty, 

Yesterday was a great day for me. I had decided to talk 
things out with Peter. Just as we were going to sit down to 
supper I whispered to him, “Are you going to do shorthand 
this evening, Peter?” “No,” was his reply. “Then I’d just like 
to talk to you later!” He agreed. After the dishes were done, I 
stood by the window in his parents’ room awhile for the look 
of things, but it wasn’t long before I went to Peter. He was 
standing on the left side of the open window, I went and stood 
on the right side, and we talked. It was much easier to talk 
beside the open window in semidarkness than in bright light, 
and I believe Peter felt the same. 

We told each other so much, so very very much, that I cant 
repeat it all, but it was lovely; the most wonderful evening I 



have ever had in the "Secret Annexe/’ I will just tell you briefly the various things we talked about. First we talked about 
the quarrels and how I regard them quite differently now, and 
then about the estrangement between us and our parents. 

I told Peter about Mummy and Daddy, and Margot, and 
about myself. 

At one moment he asked, "I suppose you always give each 
other a good night kiss, don’t you?” 

“One, dozens, why, don’t you?” 

“No, I have hardly ever kissed anyone.” 

“Not even on your birthday?” 

“Yes, I have then.” 

We talked about how we neither of us confide in our parents, and how his parents would have loved to have his confidence, but that he didn’t wish it. How I cry my heart out in 
bed, and he goes up into the loft and swears. How Margot and 
I really only know each other well for a little while, but that, 
even so, we don’t tell each other everything, because we are 
always together. Over every imaginable thing— oh, he was just 
as I thought! 

Then we talked about 1942, how different we were then. 
We just don’t recognize ourselves as the same people any 
more. How we simply couldn’t bear each other in the beginning. He thought I was much too talkative and unruly, and I 
soon came to the conclusion that I’d no time for him. I couldn’t 
understand why he didn’t flirt with me, but now I’m glad. He 
also mentioned how much he isolated himself from us all. I 
said that there was not much difference between my noise and 
his silence. That I love peace and quiet too, and have nothing 
for myself alone, except my diary. How glad he is that my 
parents have children here, and that I’m glad he is here. That 
I understand his reserve now and his relationship with his 
parents, and how I would love to be able to help him. 

“You always do help me,” he said. “How?” I asked, very 
surprised. “By your cheerfulness.” That was certainly the 
loveliest thing he said. It was wonderful, he must have grown 
to love me as a friend, and that is enough for the time being. 

the diary of a young girl xei 

I am so grateful and happy, I just can't find the words. I must 
apologize, Kitty, that my style is not up to standard today. 

I have just written down what came into my head. I have 
the feeling now that Peter and I share a secret. If he looks at 
me with those eyes that laugh and wink, then it's just as if a 
little light goes on inside me, I hope it will remain like this 
and that we may have many, many more glorious times together! 

Your grateful, happy Anne 

Monday , 20 March , 1944 

Dear Kitty, 

This morning Peter asked me if I would come again one 
evening, and said that I really didn’t disturb him, and if 
there’s room for one there’s room for two. I said that I couldn’t 
come every evening, because they wouldn’t like it downstairs, 
hut he thought that I needn’t let that bother me. Then I said 
that I would love to come one Saturday evening and especially asked him to warn me when there was a moon. “Then we’ll 
go downstairs,” he answered, “and look at the moon from 
there.” 

In the meantime a little shadow has fallen on my happiness. 
I’ve thought for a long time that Margot liked Peter quite a 
lot too. How much she loves him I don’t know, hut I think it’s 
wretched. I must cause her terrible pain each time Im with 
Peter, and the funny part of it is that she hardly shows it. 

I know quite well that I’d be desperately jealous, but 
Margot only says that I needn’t pity her. 

“I think it’s so rotten that you should be the odd one out,” 
I added. “I’m used to that,” she answered, somewhat bitterly. 

I don’t dare tell Peter this yet, perhaps later on, but we’ve 
got to talk about so many other things first. 

I had a little ticking off. yesterday evening from Mummy, 
which I certainly deserved. I mustn’t overdo my indifference 
towards her. So in spite of everything, I must try once again 
to be friendly and keep my observations to myself. 



Even Pim is different lately. He is trying not to treat me 
as such a child, and it makes him much too cool. See what 
comes of it! 

Enough for now, I’m full to the brim with Peter and can 
do nothing but look at him! 

Evidence of Margot’s goodness: I received this today, 

March 20th , 1944 

Anne, when 1 said yesterday that 1 was not jealous of you 1 was 
only fifty per cent honest. It is like this ; Ym jealous of neither you 
nor Peter. I only feel a bit sorry that 1 haven’t found anyone yet, 
and am not likely to for the time being, with whom I can discuss 
my thoughts and feelings. But 1 should not grudge it to you for 
that reason. One misses enough here anyway, things that other people just take for granted. 

On the other hand, 1 know for certain that 1 would never have 
got so far with Peter, anyway, because 1 have the feeling that if 1 
wished to discuss a lot with anyone, l should want to be on rather 
intimate terms with him. I would want to have the feeling that he 
understood me through and through without my having to say 
much. But for that reason it would have to be someone whom 1 
felt was my superior intellectually, and that is not the case with 
Peter. But 1 can imagine it being so with you and Peter. 

You are not doing me out of anything which is my due; do not 
reproach yourself in the least on my account. You and Peter can 
only gain by the friendship. 

My reply: 

Dear Margot, 

I thought your letter was exceptionally sweet, but I still don’t 
feel quite happy about it and nor do I think that I shall. 

At present there is no question of such confidence as you have in 
mind between Peter and myself, but in the twilight beside an open 
window you can say more to each other than in brilliant sunshine. 
Also it’s easier to whisper your feelings than to trumpet them forth 
out loud. I believe that you are beginning to feel a kind of sisterly 
affection for Peter, and that you would love to help him, just as 
much as 1. Perhaps you will still be able to do that sometime, although that is not the kind of confidence we have in mind. I think 
it must come from both sides, and 1 believe that’s the reason why 
Daddy and I have never got so far. 

Let’s not talk about it any more, but if you still want anything 



please write to me about it, because 1 can say what 1 mean muck 
better on paper. 

You don't know how much I admire you, and I only hope that I 
may yet acquire some of the goodness that you and Daddy have , 
because now 1 don't see much difference between you and Daddy 
in that sense. 

Yours, Anne 

Wednesday, 22 March , 1944 

Dear Kitty, 

I received this from Margot last evening: 

Dear Anne, 

After your letter yesterday l have the unpleasant feeling that you 
will have piickings of conscience when you visit Peter; but really 
there is no reason for this. In my heart of hearts I feel that I have 
the right to share mutual confidence with someone , but 1 could not 
bear Peter in that role yet. 

However , I do feel just as you say, that Peter is a bit like a 
brother, but— a younger brother; we have put out feelers towards 
each other, the affection of a brother and sister might grow if they 
touched, perhaps they will later— perhaps never, however, it has 
certainly not reached that stage yet. 

Therefore you really needn't pity me Now that you've found 
companionship , enjoy it as much as you can. 

In the meantime it is getting more and more wonderful 
here. I believe, Kitty, that we may have a real great love in 
the “Secret Annexe.” Don't worry, I’m not thinking of marrying him. I don’t know what he will be like when he grows up, 
nor do I know whether we should ever love each other enough 
to marry. I know now that Peter loves me, but just how I myself don’t know yet. 

Whether he only wants a great friend, or whether I attract 
him as a girl or as a sister, I can’t yet discover. 

When he said that I always helped him over his parents’ 
quarrels, I was awfully glad; it was one step towards making 
me believe in his friendship. I asked him yesterday what he 
would do if there were a dozen Annes here who always kept 



coming to him. His reply was, “If they were all like you, it certainly wouldn’t be too bad!” He’s tremendously hospitable towards me and I really believe he likes to see me. Meanwhile 
he is working diligently at his French, even when he's m bed, 
going on until a quarter past ten. Oh, when I think about 
Saturday evening and recall it all, word for word, then for the 
first time I don’t feel discontented about myself; I mean that I 
would still say exactly the same and wouldn’t wish to change 
anything, as is usually the case. 

He is so handsome, both when he laughs and when he looks 
quietly in front of him; he is such a darling and so good. I believe what surprised him most about me was when he discovered that I’m not a bit the superficial worldly Anne that I 
appear, but just as dreamy a specimen, with just as many difficulties as he himself. 

Yours, Anne 

Reply; 

Dear Margot, 

1 think the best thing we can do is simply to wait and see what 
happens. It cant be very long before Peter and I come to a definite 
decision , either to go on as before or he different. Just which way 
it will go I dont know myself , and 1 dont bother to look beyond 
my own nose . But I shall certainly do one thing, if Peter and I decide to be friends, 1 shall tell him that you are very fond of him too 
and would always be prepared to help him should the need arise. 
The latter may not be what you wish, but I dont care now, 1 dont 
know what Peter thinks about you, but 1 shall ask him then. 

Tm sure it's not bad-ihe oppositel You are always welcome to 
join us in the attic, or wherever we are, you honestly wont disturb 
us because 1 feel we have a silent agreement to talk only in the 
evenings when ifs dark. 

Keep your courage up f Like 1 do. Although ifs not always easy; 
your time may come sooner than you think. 

Yours, Anne 

1 65 

Thursday , 23 March , 1944 

Dear Kitty, 

Things are running more or less normally again now. 
Our coupon men are out of prison again, thank goodness! 

Miep returned yesterday. EJli is better, although she still 
has a cough; Koophuis will have to stay at home for a long 
time still. 

A plane crashed near here yesterday; the occupants were 
able to jump out in time by parachute. The machine crashed 
onto a school, but there were no children there at the time. 
The result was a small fire and two people killed. The Germans shot at the airmen terribly as they were coming down. 
The Amsterdammers who saw it nearly exploded with rage 
and indignation at the cowardliness of such a deed. We— Im 
speaking of the ladies— nearly jumped out of our skins, I loathe 
the blasted shooting. 

I often go upstairs after supper nowadays and take a breath 
of the fresh evening air. I like it up there, sitting on a chair 
beside him and looking outside. 

Van Daan and Dussel make very feeble remarks when I 
disappear into his room; "Anne’s second home,” they call it, or 
“Is it suitable for young gentlemen to receive young girls in 
semidarkness?” Peter shows amazing wit in his replies to these 
so-called humorous sallies. For that matter, Mummy too is 
somewhat curious and would love to ask what we talk about, 
if she wasn’t secretly afraid of being snubbed. Peter says it’s 
nothing but envy on the part of the grownups, because we are 
young and we don’t pay much attention to their spitefulness. 
Sometimes he comes and gets me from downstairs, but he 
turns simply scarlet in spite of all precautions, and can hardly 
get the words out of his mouth. How thankful I am that I 
don’t blush, it must be a highly unpleasant sensation. Daddy 
always says Im prudish and vain but that’s not true, I’m just 
simply vain! I have not often had anyone tell me I was pretty. 
Except a boy at school, who said I looked so attractive when I 
laughed. Yesterday I received a genuine compliment from 

 

Peter, and fust for fun I will tell you roughly how the conversation went: 

Peter so often used to say, “Do laugh, Anne!” This struck 
me as odd, and I asked, “Why must I always laugh?” 

“Because I like it; you get such dimples in your cheeks 
when you laugh; how do they come, actually?” 

“I was bom with them. I’ve got one in my chin too. That’s 
my only beauty!” 

“Of course not, that’s not true.” 

“Yes, it is, I know quite well that I’m not a beauty; I never 
have been and never shall be.” 

“I don’t agree at all, I think you’re pretty.” 

“That’s not true.” 

“If I say so, then you can take it from me it is!” 

Then I naturally said the same of him. 

I hear a lot from all sides about the sudden friendship. We 
don’t take much notice of all this parental chatter, their remarks are so feeble. Have the two sets of parents forgotten 
their own youth? It seems like it, at least they seem to take us 
seriously, if we make a joke, and laugh at us when we are serious. 

Yours, Anne 

Monday , 27 March , 1944 

Dear Kitty, 

One very big chapter of our history in hiding should really 
be about politics, but as this subject doesn’t interest me personally very much, I’ve rather let it go. So for once I will devote my whole letter to politics today. 

It goes without saying that there are very many different 
opinions on this topic, and it’s even more logical that it should 
be a favorite subject for discussion in such critical times, but— 
it’s just simply stupid that there should be so many quarrels 
over it. 

They may speculate, laugh, abuse, and grumble, let them 
do what they will, as long as they stew in their own juice and 

don't quarrel, because the consequences are usually unpleasant. 

The people from outside bring with them a lot of news that 
is not true; however, up till now our radio set hasn't lied to us. 
Hebk, Miep, Koophuis, Elli, and Kraler all show ups and 
downs in their political moods, Henk least of all 

Political feeling here in the "Secret Annexe” is always about 
the same. During the countless arguments over invasion, air 
raids, speeches, etc., etc., one also always hears the countless 
cries of "impossible,” or “Um Gottes WiUen , if they are going 
to start now however long is it going to last?” "It's going splendidly, first class, good!” Optimists and pessimists, and, above 
all, don’t let’s forget the realists who give their opinions with 
untiring energy and, just as with everything else, each one 
thinking he is right. It annoys a certain lady that her spouse 
has such unparalleled faith in the British, and a certain gentleman attacks his lady because of her teasing and disparaging 
remarks about his beloved nation. 

They never seem to tire of it, I have discovered something 
-the effects are stupendous, just like pricking someone with 
a pin and waiting to see how they jump. This is what I do: 
begin on politics. One question, one word, one sentence, and 
at once they're off! 

Just as if the German Wehrmacht news bulletins and the 
English B.B.C. were not enough, they have now introduced 
“Special Air-Raid Announcements.” In one word, magnificent; 
but on the other hand often disappointing too. The British are 
making a non-stop business of their air attacks, with the same 
zest as the Germans make a business of lying. The radio therefore goes on early in the morning and is listened to at all hours 
of the day, until nine, ten, and often eleven o'clock in the evening. 

This is certainly a sign that the grownups have infinite patience, but it also means the power of absorption of their 
brains is pretty limited, with exceptions, of course— I don't 
want to hurt anyone's feelings. One or two news bulletins 
would be ample per day! But the old geese, well— I've said 
my piece! 



Arbeiter-Programm, Radio “Oranje,” Frank Phillips or Her 
Majesty Queen Wilheknina, they each get their turn, and an 
ever attentive ear. And if they are not eating or sleeping, then 
they re sitting around the radio and discussing food, sleep, 
and politics. 

Ugh! It gets so boring, and it’s quite a job not to become 
a dull old stick oneself. Politics can't do much more harm to 
the parents! 

I must mention one shining exception-a speech by our beloved Winston Churchill is quite perfect. 

Nine o'clock on Sunday evening. The teapot stands, with 
the cozy over it, on the table, and the guests come in. Dussel 
next to the radio on the left, Mr. Van Daan in front of it, with 
Peter beside him. Mummy next to Mr. Van Daan and Mrs. Van 
Daan behind him, and Pirn at the table, Margot and I beside. 
I see I haven't described very clearly how we sit. The gentlemen puff away at their pipes, Peter’s eyes are popping out of 
his head with the strain of listening. Mummy wearing a long 
dark negligee, and Mrs. Van Daan trembling because of the 
planes, which take no notice of the speech but fly blithely on 
towards Essen, Daddy sipping tea, Margot and I united in a 
sisterly fashion by the sleeping Mouschi, who is monopolizing 
both our knees. Margot’s hair is in curlers, I am wearing a 
nightdress, which is much too small, too narrow, and too 
short. 

It all looks so intimate, snug, peaceful, and this time it is 
too, yet I await the consequences with horror. They can hardly wait till the end of the speech, stamping their feet, so impatient are they to get down to discussing it. Brr, brr, brrthey egg each other on until the arguments lead to discord 
and quarrels. 

Yours, Anne 

Tuesday , 28 March, 1944 

Dearest Kitty, 

I could write a lot more about politics, but I have heaps of 



other things to tell you today. First, Mummy has more or less 
forbidden me to go upstairs so often, because, according to 
her, Mrs. Van Daan is jealous. Secondly, Peter has invited 
Margot to join us upstairs; I don't know whether it's just out 
of politeness or whether he really means it. Thirdly, I went 
and asked Daddy if he thought I need pay any regard to Mrs. 
Van Daan's jealousy, and he didn’t think so. What next? Mummy is cross, perhaps jealous too. Daddy doesn't grudge us 
these times together, and thinks it’s nice that we get on so 
well. Margot is fond of Peter too, but feels that two’s company 
and three’s a crowd. 

Mummy thinks that Peter is in love with me; quite frankly, 
I only wish he were, then we’d be quits and really be able to 
get to know each other. She also says that he keeps on looking 
at me. Now, I suppose that’s true, but still I can’t help it if 
he looks at my dimples and we wink at each other occasionally, can I? 

I’m in a very difficult position. Mummy is against me and 
I’m against her, Daddy closes his eyes and tries not to see the 
silent battle between us. Mummy is sad, because she does 
really love me, while I’m not in the least bit sad, because I 
don’t think she understands. And Peter-I don't want to give 
Peter up, he’s such a darling. I admire him so; it can grow into 
something beautiful between us; why do the “old ’uns” have 
to poke their noses in all the time? Luckily I'm quite used to 
hiding my feelings and I manage extremely well not to let 
them see how mad I am about him. Will he ever say anything? 
Will I ever feel his cheek against mine, like I felt Petel’s cheek 
in my dream? Oh, Peter and Petel, you are one and the samel 
They don’t understand us; won’t they ever grasp that we are 
happy, just sitting together and not saying a word. They don't 
understand what has driven us together like this. Oh, when 
will all these difficulties be overcome? And yet it is good to 
overcome them, because then the end will be all the more 
wonderful. When he lies with his head on his arm with his 
eyes closed, then he is still a child; when he plays with Boche, 
he is loving; when he carries potatoes or anything heavy, then 
he is strong; when he goes and watches the shooting, or looks 



for burglars in the darkness, then he is brave; and when he is 
so awkward and clumsy, then he is just a pet. 

I like it much better if he explains something to me than 
when I have to teach him; I would really adore him to be my 
superior in almost everything. 

What do we care about the two mothers? Oh, but if only he 
would speak! 

Yours, Anne 

Wednesday, 29 March, 1944 

Dear Kitty, 

Bolkestein, an M.P., was speaking on the Dutch News from 
London, and he said that they ought to make a collection of 
diaries and letters after the war. Of course, they all made a 
rush at my diary immediately. Just imagine how interesting it 
would be if I were to publish a romance of the “Secret Annexe.” The title 1 alone would be enough to make people think 
it was a detective story. 

But, seriously, it would seem quite funny ten years after the 
war if we Jews were to tell how we lived and what we ate and 
talked about here. Although I tell you a lot, still, even so, you 
only know very little of our lives. 

How scared the ladies are during the air raids. For instance, 
on Sunday, when 350 British planes dropped half a million 
kilos of bombs on Ijmuiden, how the houses trembled like a 
wisp of grass in the wind, and who knows how many epidemics now rage. You don't know anything about all these things, 
and I would need to keep on writing the whole day if I were 
to tell you everything in detail. People have to line up for 
vegetables and all kinds of other things; doctors are unable to 
visit the sick, because if they turn their backs on their cars for 
a moment, they are stolen; burglaries and thefts abound, so 
much so that you wonder what has taken hold of the Dutch for 
them suddenly to have become such thieves. Little children of 

^•The original title of this diary was Het Achterhms There is no exact translation into English, the nearest being The Secret Annexe 

eight and eleven years break the windows of people's homes 
and steal whatever they can lay their hands on. No one dares 
to leave his house unoccupied for five minutes, because if you 
go, your things go too. Every day there are announcements in 
the newspapers offering rewards for the return of lost property, typewriters, Persian rugs, electric clocks, cloth, etc., etc. 
Electric clocks in the streets are dismantled, public telephones 
are pulled to pieces— down to the last thread. Morale among 
the population cant be good, the weekly rations are not 
enough to last for two days except the coffee substitute. The 
invasion is a long time coming, and the men have to go to 
Germany. The children are ill or undernourished, everyone is 
wearing old clothes and old shoes. A new sole costs 7.50 florins 
in the black market; moreover, hardly any of the shoemakers 
will accept shoe repairs or, if they do, you have to wait 
months, during which time the shoes often disappear. 

There’s one good thing in the midst of it all, which is that 
as the food gets worse and the measures against the people 
more severe, so sabotage against the authorities steadily increases. The people m the food offices, the police, officials, 
they all either work with their fellow citizens and help them 
or they tell tales on them and have them sent to prison. Fortunately, only a small percentage of Dutch people are on the 
wrong side. 

Yours, Anne 

Friday, SI March , 1944 

Dear Kitty, 

Think of it, it’s still pretty cold, but most people have been 
without coal for about a month-pleasant, ehl In general public feeling over the Russian front is optimistic again, because 
that is terrific! You know I don’t write much about politics, 
but I must just tell you where they are now; they are right by 
the Polish border and have reached the Pruth near Rumania. 
They are close to Odessa. Every evening here they expect an 
extra communique from Stalin. 



They fire off so many salvos in Moscow to celebrate their 
victories that the city must rumble and shake just about every 
day-whether they think it's fun to pretend that the war is 
close at hand again or that they know of no other way of expressing their joy, I don’t know! 

Hungary is occupied by German troops. There are still a 
million Jews there, so they too will have had it now. 

The chatter about Peter and me has calmed down a bit 
now. We are very good friends, are together a lot and discuss 
every imaginable subject. It is awfully nice never to have to 
keep a check on myself as I would have to with other boys, 
whenever we get on to precarious ground. We were talking, 
for instance, about blood and via that subject we began talking 
about menstruation. He thinks we women are pretty tough. 
Why on earth? My life here has improved, greatly improved. 
God has not left me alone and will not leave me alone. 

Yours, Anne 

Saturday , 1 April, 1944 

Dear Kitty, 

And yet everything is still so difficult; I expect you can 
guess what I mean, cant you? I am so longing for a kiss, the 
kiss that is so long in coming. I wonder if all the time he still 
regards me as a friend? Am I nothing more? 

You know and I know that I am strong, that I can carry 
most of my burdens alone. I have never been used to sharing 
my troubles with anyone, I have never clung to my mother, 
but now I would so love to lay my head on ‘has” shoulder just 
once and remain still. 

I can’t, I simply can’t ever forget that dream of Peters 
cheek, when it was all, all so good! Wouldn’t he long for it 
too? Is it that he is just too shy to acknowledge his love? Why 
does he want me with him so often? Oh, why doesn’t he 
speak? 

I’d better stop, I must he quiet, I shall remain strong and 
with a bit of patience the other will come too, but-and that is 

the worst of it— it looks just as if Im running after him; I am 
always the one who goes upstairs, he doesn't come to me. 

But that is just because of the rooms, and he is sure to understand the difficulty. 

Oh, yes, and there's more he'll understand. 

Yours, Anne 

Monday , 3 April , 1944 

Dear Kitty, 

Contrary to my usual custom, I will for once write more 
fully about food because it has become a very difficult and 
important matter, not only here in the "Secret Annexe” but in 
the whole of Holland, all Europe, and even beyond. 

In the twenty-one months that wove spent here we have 
been through a good many "food cycles”— you'll understand 
what that means in a minute. When I talk of "food cycles” I 
mean periods in which one has nothing else to eat but one 
particular dish or kind of vegetable. We had nothing but endive for a long time, day in, day out, endive with sand, endive 
without sand, stew with endive, boiled or en casserole; then it 
was spinach, and after that followed kohlrabi, salsify, cucumbers, tomatoes, sauerkraut, etc., etc. 

For instance, it's really disagreeable to eat a lot of sauerkraut for lunch and supper every day, but you do it if you re 
hungry. However, we have the most delightful period of all 
now, because we don't get any fresh vegetables at all. Our 
weekly menu for supper consists of kidney beans, pea soup, 
potatoes with dumplings, potato-chalet and, by the grace of 
God, occasionally turnip tops or rotten carrots, and then the 
kidney beans once again. We eat potatoes at every meal, beginning with breakfast, because of the bread shortage. We 
make our soup from kidney or haricot beans, potatoes, Julienne soup in packets, French beans in packets, kidney beans 
in packets. Everything contains beans, not to mention the 
bread! 

In the evening we always have potatoes with gravy substi


tut© and-thank goodness weve still got it-beetroot salad. I 
must still tell you about the dumplings, which we make out of 
government flour, water, and yeast. They are so sticky and 
tough, they lie like stones in ones stomach— ah, welll 
The great attraction each week is a slice of liver sausage, and 
jam on dry bread. But we're still alive, and quite often we 
even enjoy our poor meals. 

Yours, Anne 

Tuesday , 4 April, 1944 

Dear Kitty, 

For a long time I haven't had any idea of what I was working for any more; the end of the war is so terribly far away, 
so unreal, like a fairy tale. If the war isn't over by September 
I shan't go to school any more, because I don’t want to be 
two years behind. Peter filled my days-nothing but Peter, 
dreams and thoughts until Saturday, when I felt so utterly 
miserable; oh, it was terrible. I was holding back my tears all 
the while I was with Peter, then laughed with Van Daan over 
lemon punch, was cheerful and excited, but the moment I 
was alone I knew that I would have to cry my heart out. So, 
clad in my nightdress, I let myself go and slipped down onto 
the floor. First I said my long prayer very earnestly, then I 
cried with my head on my arms, my knees bent up, on the 
bare floor, completely folded up. One large sob brought me 
back to earth again, and I quelled my tears because I didn’t 
want them to hear anything in the next room. Then I began 
trying to talk some courage into myself. I could only say: “I 
must, I must, I must . . Completely stiff from the unnatural 
position, I fell against the side of the bed and fought on, until 
I climbed into bed again just before half past ten. It was over! 

And now it's all over. I must work, so as not to be a fool, to 
get on, to become a journalist, because that's what I want! I 
know that I can write, a couple of my stories are good, my 
descriptions of the “Secret Annexe” are humorous, there’s a 

THE DIARY OF A YOUNG GIRL 175 

lot in my diary that speaks, but-whether I have real talent 
remains to be seen. 

"Eva's Dream" is my best fairy tale, and the queer thing 
about it is that I don't know where it comes from. Quite a lot 
of “Cady's Life" is good too, but, on the whole, it's nothing. 

I am the best and sharpest critic of my own work. I know 
myself what is and what is not well written. Anyone who 
doesn't write doesn't know how wonderful it is; I used to bemoan the fact that I couldn't draw at all, but now I am more 
than happy that I can at least write. And if I haven't any 
talent for writing books or newspaper articles, well, then I can 
always write for myself. 

I want to get on; I can't imagine that I would have to lead 
the same sort of life as Mummy and Mrs. Van Daan and all 
the women who do their work and are then forgotten. I must 
have something besides a husband and children, something 
that I can devote myself to! 

I want to go on living even after my death! And therefore 
I am grateful to God for giving me this gift, this possibility of 
developing myself and of writing, of expressing all that is in 
me. 

I can shake off everything if I write; my sorrows disappear, 
my courage is reborn. But, and that is the great question, will 
I ever be able to write anything great, will I ever become a 
journalist or a writer? I hope so, oh, I hope so very much, for 
I can recapture everything when I write, my thoughts, my 
ideals and my fantasies. 

I haven't done anything more to “Cady's Life" for ages; in 
my mind I know exactly how to go on, but somehow it doesn't 
flow from my pen. Perhaps I never shall finish it, it may land 
up in the wastepaper basket, or the fire . . , that's a horrible 
idea, but then I think to myself, “At the age of fourteen and 
with so little experience, how can you write about philosophy?" 

So I go on again with fresh courage; I think I shall succeed, 
because I want to write! 

Yours, Anne 



Thursday, 6 April, 1944 

Dear Kitty, 

You asked me what my hobbies and interests were, so I 
want to reply. I warn you, however, that there are heaps of 
them, so don’t get a shock! 

First of all: writing, but that hardly counts as a hobby. 

Number two: family trees. I’ve been searching for family 
trees of the French, German, Spanish, English, Austrian, Russian, Norwegian, and Dutch royal families in all the newspapers, books, and pamphlets I can find. I’ve made great 
progress with a lot of them, as, for a long time already, I’ve 
been taking down notes from all the biographies and history 
books that I read; I even copy out many passages of history. 

My third hobby then is history, on which Daddy has already bought me a lot of books. I can hardly wait for the day 
that I shall be able to comb through the books in a public 
library. 

Number four is Greek and Roman mythology. I have various books about this too. 

Other hobbies are film stars and family photos. Mad on 
books and reading. Have a great liking for history of art, poets 
and painters. I may go in for music later on. I have a great 
loathing for algebra, geometry, and figures. 

I enjoy all the other school subjects, but history above all! 

Yours, Anne 

Tuesday, 11 April , 1944 

Dear Kitty, 

My head throbs, I honestly don’t know where to begin. 

On Friday (Good Friday) we played Monopoly, Saturday 
afternoon too. These days passed quickly and uneventfully. 
On Sunday afternoon, on my invitation, Peter came to my 
room at half past four; at a quarter past five we went to the 
front attic, where we remained until six o’clock. There was a 
beautiful Mozart concert on the radio from six o’clock until a 

THE DIARY OF A YOUNG GIRL 177 

quarter past seven. I enjoyed it all very much, but especially 
the “Kleine Nachtmusik.” I can hardly listen in the room because Im always so inwardly stirred when I hear lovely music. 

On Sunday evening Peter and I went to the front attic together and, in order to sit comfortably, we took with us a few 
divan cushions that we were able to lay our hands on. We 
seated ourselves on one packing case. Both the case and the 
cushions were very narrow, so we sat absolutely squashed together, leaning against other cases. Mouschi kept us company 
too, so we weren’t unchaperoned. 

Suddenly, at a quarter to nine, Mr. Van Daan whistled and 
asked if we had one of Dussel’s cushions. We both jumped up 
and went downstairs with cushion, cat, and Van Daan. 

A lot of trouble arose out of this cushion, because Dussel 
was annoyed that we had one of his cushions, one that he used 
as a pillow. He was afraid that there might be fleas in it and 
made a great commotion about his beloved cushion! Peter and 
I put two hard brushes in his bed as a revenge. We had a good 
laugh over this little interlude! 

Our fun didn’t last long. At half past nine Peter knocked 
softly on the door and asked Daddy if he would just help him 
upstairs over a difficult English sentence. “That’s a blind,” I 
said to Margot, “anyone could see through that one!” I was 
right. They were in the act of breaking into the warehouse. 
Daddy, Van Daan, Dussel, and Peter were downstairs in a 
flash. Margot, Mummy, Mrs. Van Daan, and I stayed upstairs 
and waited. 

Four frightened women just have to talk, so talk we did, 
until we heard a bang downstairs. After that all was quiet, the 
clock struck a quarter to ten. The color had vanished from our 
faces, we were still quiet, although we were afraid. Where 
could the men be? What was that bang? Would they be fighting the burglars? Ten o’clock, footsteps on the stairs: Daddy, 
white and nervous, entered, followed by Mr. Van Daan. 
“Lights out, creep upstairs, we expect the police in the house!” 

There was no time to be frightened: the lights went out, I 
quickly grabbed a jacket, and we were upstairs. “What has 
happened? Tell us quickly!” There was no one to tell us, the 



men having disappeared downstairs again. Only at ten past 
ten did they reappear; two kept watch at Peter's open window, the door to the landing was closed, the swinging cupboard shut. We hung a jersey round the night light, and after 
that they told us: 

Peter heard two loud bangs on the landing, ran downstairs, 
and saw there was a large plank out of the left half of the 
door. He dashed upstairs, warned the "Home Guard" of the 
family, and the four of them proceeded downstairs. When 
they entered the warehouse, the burglars were in the act of 
enlarging the hole. Without further thought Van Daan 
shouted: “Police!" 

A few hurried steps outside, and the burglars had fled. In 
order to avoid the hole being noticed by the police, a plank 
was put against it, but a good hard kick from outside sent it 
flying to the ground. The men were perplexed at such impudence, and both Van Daan and Peter felt murder welling 
up within them; Van Daan beat on the ground with a chopper, and all was quiet again. Once more they wanted to put 
the plank in front of the hole. Disturbance! A married couple 
outside shone a torch through the opening, lighting up the 
whole warehouse. “Hell!” muttered one of the men, and now 
they switched over from their role of police to that of burglars. 
The four of them sneaked upstairs, Peter quickly opened the 
doors and windows of the kitchen and private office, flung the 
telephone onto the floor, and finally the four of them landed 
behind the swinging cupboard. 

END OF PART ONE 

The married couple with the torch would probably have 
warned the police: it was Sunday evening, Easter Sunday, no 
one at the office on Easter Monday, so none of us could budge 
until Tuesday morning. Think of it, waiting in such fear for 
two nights and a day! No one had anything to suggest, so we 
simply sat there in pitch-darkness, because Mrs. Van Daan in 

her fright had unintentionally turned the lamp right out; 
talked in whispers, and at every creak one heard “Shi sh!” 

It turned half past ten, eleven, but not a sound; Daddy and 
Van Daan joined us in turns. Then a quarter past eleven, a 
bustle and noise downstairs. Everyone’s breath was audible, 
otherwise no one moved. Footsteps in the house, in the private 
office, kitchen, then ... on our staircase. No one breathed 
audibly now, footsteps on our staircase, then a rattling of the 
swinging cupboard. This moment is indescribable. “Now we 
are lost!” I said, and could see us all being taken away by the 
Gestapo that very night. Twice they rattled at the cupboard, 
then there was nothing, the footsteps withdrew, we were 
saved so far. A shiver seemed to pass from one to another, I 
heard someone’s teeth chattering, no one said a word. 

There was not another sound in the house, but a light was 
burning on our landing, right in front of the cupboard. Could 
that be because it was a secret cupboard? Perhaps the police 
had forgotten the light? Would someone come back to put it 
out? Tongues loosened, there was no one in the house any 
longer, perhaps there was someone on guard outside. 

Next we did three things: we went over again what we supposed had happened, we trembled with fear, and we had to 
go to the lavatory. The buckets were in the attic, so all we had 
was Peter s tin wastepaper basket. Van Daan went first, then 
Daddy, but Mummy was too shy to face it. Daddy brought 
the wastepaper basket into the room, where Margot, Mrs. 
Van Daan, and I gladly made use of it. Finally Mummy decided to do so too. People kept on asking for paper— fortunately I had some in my pocket! 

The tin smelled ghastly, everything went on in a whisper, 
we were tired, it was twelve o’clock. “Lie down on the floor 
then and sleep.” Margot and I were each given a pillow and 
one blanket; Margot lying just near the store cupboard and I 
between the table legs. The smell wasn’t quite so bad when 
one was on the floor, but still Mrs. Van Daan quietly brought 
some chlorine, a tea towel over the pot serving as a second 
expedient. 

Talk, whispers, fear, stink, flatulation, and always someone 



on the pot; then try to go to sleep! However, by half past two 
I was so tired that I knew no more until half past three. I 
awoke when Mrs. Van Daan laid her head on my foot. 

“For heaven s sake, give me something to put on!” I asked. 
I was given something, but don’t ask what— a pair of woolen 
knickers over my pajamas, a red jumper, and a black skirt, 
white oversocks and a pair of sports stockings full of holes. 
Then Mrs. Van Daan sat in the chair and her husband came 
and lay on my feet. I lay thinking till half past three, shivering the whole time, which prevented Van Daan from sleeping. 
I prepared myself for the return of the police, then we’d have 
to say that we were in hiding; they would either be good 
Dutch people, then we’d be saved, or N.S.B.-ers, 1 then we’d 
have to bribe them! 

“In that case, destroy the radio,” sighed Mrs. Van Daan. 
“Yes, in the stove!” replied her husband. “If they find us, then 
let them find the radio as well!” 

‘Then they will find Anne’s diary,” added Daddy. “Bum it 
then,” suggested the most terrified member of the party. This, 
and when the police rattled the cupboard door, were my 
worst moments. “Not my diary; if my diary goes, I go with it!” 
But luckily Daddy didn’t answer, 

There is no object in recounting all the conversations that I 
can still remember; so much was said. I comforted Mrs. Van 
Daan, who was very scared. We talked about escaping and 
bemg questioned by the Gestapo, about ringing up, and being 
brave. 

“We must behave like soldiers, Mrs. Van Daan. If all is up 
now, then let’s go for Queen and Country, for freedom, truth, 
and the right, as they always say on the Dutch News from 
England. The only thing that is really rotten is that we get a 
lot of other people into trouble too.” 

Mr. Van Daan changed places again with his wife after an 
hour, and Daddy came and sat beside me. The men smoked 
non-stop, now and then there was a deep sigh, then someone 
went on the pot and everything began all over again. 

Four o’clock, five o’clock, half past five. Then I went and 

x The Dutch National Socialist Movement. 



sat with Peter by his window and listened, so close together 
that we could feel each other’s bodies quivering; we spoke a 
word or two now and then, and listened attentively. In the 
room next door they took down the blackout. They wanted to 
call up Koophuis at seven o’clock and get him to send someone around. Then they wrote down everything they wanted to 
tell Koophuis over the phone. The risk that the police on 
guard at the door, or in the warehouse, might hear the telephone was very great, but the danger of the police returning 
was even greater. 

The points were these: 

Burglars broken in: police have been in the house, as far as 
the swinging cupboard, but no further. 

Burglars apparently disturbed, forced open the door in the 
warehouse and escaped through the garden. 

Main entrance bolted, Kraler must have used the second 
door when he left. The typewriters and adding machine are 
safe in the black case in the private office. 

Try to warn Henk and fetch the key from EUi, then go and 
look round the office— on the pretext of feeding the cat. 

Everything went according to plan. Koophuis was phoned, 
the typewriters which we had upstairs were put in the case. 
Then we sat around the table again and waited for Henk or 
the police. 

Peter had fallen asleep and Van Daan and I were lying on 
the floor, when we heard loud footsteps downstairs. I got up 
quietly: “That’s Henk.” 

“No, no, it’s the police,” some of the others said. 

Someone knocked at the door, Miep whistled. This was too 
much for Mrs. Van Daan, she turned as white as a sheet and 
sank limply into a chair; had the tension lasted one minute 
longer she would have fainted. 

Our room was a perfect picture when Miep and Henk entered, the table alone would have been worth photographing! 
A copy of Cinema and Theater, covered with jam and a 
remedy for diarrhea, opened at a page of dancing girls, two 
jam pots, two started loaves of bread, a mirror, comb, matches. 



ash, cigarettes, tobacco, ash tray, books, a pair of pants, a 
torch, toilet paper, etc., etc., lay jumbled together in variegated splendor. 

Of course Henk and Miep were greeted with shouts and 
tears. Henk mended the hole in the door with some planks, 
and soon went off again to inform the police of the burglary. 
Miep had also found a letter under the warehouse door from 
the night watchman Slagter, who had noticed the hole and 
warned the police, whom he would also visit 

So we had half an hour to tidy ourselves. I’ve never seen 
such a change take place in half an hour. Margot and I took 
the bedclothes downstairs, went to the W.C., washed, and did 
our teeth and hair. After that I tidied the room a bit and went 
upstairs again. The table there was already cleared, so we ran 
off some water and made coffee and tea, boiled the milk, and 
laid the table for lunch. Daddy and Peter emptied the potties 
and cleaned them with warm water and chlorine. 

At eleven o’clock we sat round the table with Henk, who 
was back by that time, and slowly things began to be more 
normal and cozy again. Henk’s story was as follows: 

Mr. Slagter was asleep, but his wife told Henk that her husband had found the hole in our door when he was doing his 
tour round the canals, and that he had called a policeman, 
who had gone through the building with him. He would be 
coming to see Kraler on Tuesday and would tell him more 
then. At the police station they knew nothing of the burglary 
yet, but the policeman had made a note of it at once and 
would come and look round on Tuesday. On the way back 
Henk happened to meet our greengrocer at the comer, and 
told him that the house had been broken into. “I know that,” 
he said quite coolly. “I was passing last evening with my wife 
and saw the hole in the door. My wife wanted to walk on, but 
I just had a look in with my torch; then the thieves cleared at 
once. To be on the safe side, I didn’t ring up the police, as 
with you I didn’t think it was the thing to do. I don’t know 
anything, but I guess a lot.” 

Henk thanked him and went on. The man obviously guesses 

THE DIARY OF a YOUNG GIRL 183 

that we're here, because he always brings the potatoes during 
the lunch hour. Such a nice man! 

It was one by the time Henk had gone and we'd finished 
doing the dishes. We all went for a sleep. I awoke at a quarter 
to three and saw that Mr. Dussel had already disappeared. 
Quite by chance, and with my sleepy eyes, I ran into Peter in 
lie bathroom; he had just come down. We arranged to meet 
downstairs. 

I tidied myself and went down. “Do you still dare to go to 
the front attic?” he asked. I nodded, fetched my pillow, and 
we went up to the attic. It was glorious weather, and soon the 
sirens were wailing; we stayed where we were. Peter put his 
arm around my shoulder, and I put mine around his and so 
we remained, our arms around each other, quietly waiting until Margot came to fetch us for coffee at four o'clock. 

We finished our bread, drank lemonade and joked (we 
were able to again), otherwise everything went normally. In 
the evening I thanked Peter because he was the bravest of us 
aff. 

None of us has ever been in such danger as that night. God 
truly protected us; just think of it— the police at our secret 
cupboard, the light on right in front of it, and still we remained undiscovered. 

If the invasion comes, and bombs with it, then it is each 
man for himself, but in this case the fear was also for our good, 
innocent protectors. “We are saved, go on saving us!” That is 
all we can say. 

This affair has brought quite a number of changes with it. 
Mr. Dussel no longer sits downstairs in Kraler’s office in the 
evenings, but in the bathroom instead. Peter goes round the 
house for a checkup at half past eight and half past nine. Peter 
isn't allowed to have his window open at nights any more. No 
one is allowed to pull the plug after half past nine. This evening there's a carpenter coming to make the warehouse doors 
even stronger. 

Now there are debates going on all the time in the “Secret 
Annexe.” Kraler reproached us for our carelessness. Henk, too, 
said that in a case like that we must never go downstairs. We 



have been pointedly reminded that we are in hiding, that we 
are Jews in chains, chained to one spot, without any rights, but 
with a thousand duties. We Jews mustn't show our feelings, 
must be brave and strong, must accept all inconveniences and 
not gr um ble, must do what is within our power and trust in 
God. Sometime this terrible war will be over. Surely the time 
will come when we are people again, and not just Jews. 

Who has inflicted this upon us? Who has made us Jews different from all other people? Who has allowed us to suffer so 
terribly up till now? It is God that has made us as we are, but 
it will be God, too, who will raise us up again. If we bear all 
this suffering and if there are still Jews left, when it is over, 
then Jews, instead of being doomed, will be held up as an example. Who knows, it might even be our religion from which 
the world and all peoples learn good, and for that reason and 
that reason only do we have to suffer now. We can never become just Netherlander, or just English, or representatives 
of any country for that matter, we will always remain Jews, 
but we want to, too. 

Be brave! Let us remain aware of our task and not grumble, 
a solution will come, God has never deserted our people. Right 
through the ages there have been Jews, through all the ages 
they have had to suffer, but it has made them strong too; the 
weak fall, but the strong will remain and never go under! 

During that night I really felt that I had to die, I waited for 
the police, I was prepared, as the soldier is on the battlefield. 
I was eager to lay down my life for the country, but now, now 
Ive been saved again, now my first wish after the war is that I 
may become Dutch! I love the Dutch, I love this country, I 
love the language and want to work here. And even if I have 
to write to the Queen myself, I will not give up until I have 
reached my goal. 

I am becoming still more independent of my parents, young 
as I am, I face life with more courage than Mummy; my feeling for justice is immovable, and truer than hers. I know what 
I want, I have a goal, an opinion, I have a religion and love. 
Let me be myself and then I am satisfied. I know that I’m a 
woman, a woman with inward strength and plenty of courage. 

If God lets me live, I shall attain more than Mummy ever 
has done, I shall not remain insignificant, I shall work in the 
world and for mankind! 

And now I know that first and foremost I shall require courage and cheerfulness! 

Yours, Anne 

Friday , 14 April , 1944 

Dear Kitty, 

The atmosphere here is still extremely strained. Pirn has just 
about reached boiling point. Mrs. Van Daan is in bed with a 
cold and trumpeting away. Mr. Van Daan grows pale without 
his fags, Dussel, who is giving up a lot of his comfort, is full of 
observations, etc., etc. 

There is no doubt that our luck's not in at the moment. The 
lavatory leaks and the washer of the tap has gone, but, thanks 
to our many connections, we shall soon be able to get these 
things put right. 

I am sentimental sometimes, I know that, but there is occasion to be sentimental here at times, when Peter and I are 
sitting somewhere together on a hard, wooden crate in the 
midst of masses of rubbish and dust, our arms around each 
other's shoulders, and very close, he with one of my curls in 
his hand; when the birds sing outside and you see the trees 
changing to green, the sun invites one to be out in the open 
air, when the sky is so blue, then— oh, then, I wish for so 
much! 

One sees nothing but dissatisfied, grumpy faces here, nothing but sighs and suppressed complaints; it really would seem 
as if suddenly we were very badly off here. If the truth is told, 
things are just as bad as you yourself care to make them. 
There's no one here that sets a good example; everyone should 
see that he gets the better of his own moods. Every day you 
hear, "If only it was all over." 

My work, my hope, my love, my courage, all these things 
keep my head above water and keep me from complaining. 



I really believe, Kits, that I'm slightly bats today, and yet I 
don t know why. Everything here is so mixed up, nothings 
connected any more, and sometimes I very much doubt 
whether in the future anyone will be interested in all my tosh. 

“The unbosomings of an ugly duckling” will be the title of 
all this nonsense. My diary really wont be much use to Messrs. 
Bolkestein or Gerbrandy . 1 

Yours, Anne 

Saturday, 15 April, 1944 

Dear Kitty, 

"Shock upon shock. Will there ever be an end?” We honestly can ask ourselves that question now. Guess what's the 
latest. Peter forgot to unbolt the front door (which is bolted 
on the inside at night) and the lock of the other door doesn't 
work. The result was that Kraler and the men could not get 
into the house, so he went to the neighbors, forced open the 
kitchen window, and entered the building from the back. He 
is livid at us for being so stupid. 

I can tell you, it's upset Peter frightfully. At one meal, when 
M umm y said she felt more sorry for Peter than anyone else, 
he almost started to cry. Were all just as much to blame as he 
is, because nearly every day the men ask whether the door’s 
been unbolted and, just today, no one did. 

Perhaps I shall be able to console him a bit later on; I 
would so love to help him. 

Yours, Anne 

Sunday morning, just before eleven o'clock, 

16 April, 1944 

Darlingest Kitty, 

Remember yesterday's date, for it is a very important day 
in my life. Surely it is a great day for every girl when she re
iTwo members of the wartime Dutch Cabinet-in-Exile in London. 



ceives her first kiss? Well, then, it is just as important for me 
too! Brains kiss on my right cheek doesn’t count any more, 
likewise the one from Mr. Walker on my right hand. 

How did I suddenly come by this kiss? Well, I will tell you. 

Yesterday evening at eight o’clock I was sitting with Peter 
on his divan, it wasn’t long before his arm went round me. 
“Let’s move up a bit,” I said, “then I don’t bump my head 
against the cupboard.” He moved up, almost into the comer, 
I laid my arm under his and across his back, and he just about 
buried me, because his arm was hanging on my shoulder. 

Now we’ve sat like this on other occasions, but never so 
close together as yesterday. He held me firmly against him, 
my left shoulder against his chest; already my heart began to 
beat faster, but we had not finished yet. He didn’t rest until 
my head was on his shoulder and his against it. When I sat 
upright again after about five minutes, he soon took my head 
in his hands and laid it against him once more. Oh, it was so 
lovely, I couldn’t talk much, the joy was too great. He stroked 
my cheek and arm a bit awkwardly, played with my curls and 
our heads lay touching most of the time. I can’t tell you, Kitty, 
the feeling that ran through me all the while. I was too happy 
for words, and I believe he was as well. 

We got up at half past eight. Peter put on his gym shoes, 
so that when he toured the house he wouldn’t make a noise, 
and I stood beside him. How it came about so suddenly, I 
don’t know, but before we went downstairs he kissed me, 
through my hair, half on my left cheek, half on my ear; I tore 
downstairs without looking round, and am simply longing for 
today! 

Yours, Anne 

Monday , 17 April , 1944 

Dear Kitty, 

Do you think that Daddy and Mummy would approve of 
my sitting and kissing a boy on a divan— a boy of seventeen 
and a half and a girl of just under fifteen? I don’t really think 
they would, but I must rely on myself over this. It is so quiet 



and peaceful to lie in his arms and to dream, it is so thrilling 
to feel his cheek against mine, it is so lovely to know that 
there is someone waiting for me. But there is indeed a big 
“but,” because will Peter be content to leave it at this? I 
haven t forgotten his promise already, but ... he is a boy! 

I know myself that I’m starting very soon, not even fifteen, 
and so independent already! It’s certainly hard for other 
people to understand, I know almost for certain that Margot 
would never kiss a boy unless there had been some talk of an 
engagement or marriage, but neither Peter nor I have anything like that in mind. I’m sure too that Mummy never 
touched a man before Daddy. What would my girl friends 
say about it if they knew that I lay in Peters arms, my heart 
against his chest, my head on his shoulder and with his head 
against mine! 

Oh, Anne, how scandalous! But honestly, I don’t think it 
Is; we are shut up here, shut away from the world, in fear and 
anxiety, especially just lately. Why, then, should we who love 
each other remain apart? Why should we wait until we’ve 
reached a suitable age? Why should we bother? 

I have taken it upon myself to look after myself; he would 
never want to cause me sorrow or pain. Why shouldn’t I 
follow the way my heart leads me, if it makes us both happy? 
All the same, Kitty, I believe you can sense that I’m in doubt, 
I think it must be my honesty which rebels against doing 
anything on the sly! Do you think it’s my duty to tell Daddy 
what I’m doing? Do you think we should share our secret with 
a third person? A lot of the beauty would be lost, but would 
my conscience feel happier? I will discuss it with “him.” 

Oh, yes, there’s still so much I want to talk to him about, 
for I don’t see the use of only just cuddling each other. To 
exchange our thoughts, that shows confidence and faith in 
each other, we would both be sure to profit by it! 

Yours, Anne 

Tuesday , 18 April , 1944 

Dear Kitty, 

Everything goes well here. Daddy's just said that he definitely expects large-scale operations to take place before the 
twentieth of May, both in Russia and Italy, and also in the 
West; I find it more and more difficult to imagine our liberation from here. 

Yesterday Peter and I finally got down to our talk, which 
had already been put off for at least ten days. I explained 
everything about girls to him and didn't hesitate to discuss 
the most intimate things. The evening ended by each giving 
the other a kiss, just about beside my mouth, it's really a lovely 
feeling. 

Perhaps IH take my diary up there sometime, to go more 
deeply into things for once. I don't get any satisfaction out 
of lying in each other's arms day in, day out, and would so 
like to feel that he's the same. 

We are having a superb spring after our long, lingering 
winter; April is really glorious, not too hot and not too cold, 
with little showers now and then. Our chestnut tree is already quite greenish and you can even see little blooms here 
and there. 

Elli gave us a treat on Saturday, by bringing four bunches 
of flowers, three bunches of narcissus and one of grape hyacinths, the latter being for me. 

I must do some algebra, Kitty-good-by. 

Yours, Anne 

Wednesday, 19 April, 1944 

My darling, 

Is there anything more beautiful in the world than to sit 
before an open window and enjoy nature, to listen to the 
birds singing, feel the sun on your cheeks and have a darling 
boy in your arms? It is so soothing and peaceful to feel his 
arms around me, to know that he is close by and yet to re

 

main silent, it can t -be bad, for this tranquillity is good. Ob, 
never to be disturbed again, not even by Mouscbi. 

Yours, Anne 

Friday , 21 April, 1944 

Dear Kitty, 

Yesterday afternoon I was lying in bed with a sore throat, 
but since I was already bored on the first day and did not 
have a temperature, I got up again today. It’s tbe eighteenth 
birthday of Her Royal Highness Princess Elizabeth of York. 
The B.B.C. has said that she will not be declared of age yet, 
though it's usually the case with royal children. We have been 
asking ourselves what prince this beauty is going to marry, but 
cannot think of anyone suitable. Perhaps her sister, Princess 
Margaret Rose, can have Prince Baudouin of Belgium one 
day. 

Here we are haying one misfortune after another. Scarcely 
had the outside doors been strengthened than the warehouse 
man appeared again. In all probability it was he who stole 
the potato meal and wants to put the blame on to Elli’s 
shoulders. The whole “Secret Annexe” is understandably het 
up again. Elli is beside herself with anger. 

I want to send in to some paper or other to see if they will 
take one of my stories, under a pseudonym, of course. 

Till next time, darling! 

Yours, Anne 

Tuesday, 25 April, 1944 

Dear Kitty, 

Dussel has not been on speaking terms with Van Daan for 
ten days and just because, ever since the burglary, a whole lot 
of fresh security measures have been made that don’t suit 
him. He maintains that Van Daan has been shouting at him. 

“Everything here happens upside down,” he told me. “I 

am going to speak to your father about it.” He is not supposed to sit in the office downstairs on Saturday afternoons 
and Sundays any more, but he goes on doing it just the same. 
Van Daan was furious and Father went downstairs to talk to 
him. Naturally, he kept on inventing excuses, but this time he 
could not get around even Father. Father now talks to him 
as little as possible, as Dussel has insulted him. None of us 
know in what way, but it must have been very bad. 

I have written a lovely story called “Blurr, the Explorer ” 
which pleased the three to whom I read it very much. 

Yours, Anne 

Thursday , 27 April , 1944 

Dear Kitty, 

Mrs. Van Daan was in such a bad mood this morning, 
nothing but complaints! First, there’s her cold, and she cant 
get any lozenges, and so much nose-blowing is unendurable. 
Next, it’s that the sun’s not shining, that the invasion doesn’t 
come, that we can t look out of the windows, etc., etc. We all 
had to laugh at her; and she was sporting enough to join in. 
At the moment I’m reading The Emperor Charles V, written 
by a professor at Gottingen University; he worked at the book 
for forty years. I read fifty pages in five days; it’s impossible 
to do more. The book has 598 pages, so now you can work 
out how long it will take me-and there is a second volume to 
follow. But very interesting. 

What doesn’t a schoolgirl get to know in a single dayl Take 
me, for example. First, I translated a piece from Dutch into 
English, about Nelson’s last battle. After that, I went through 
some more of Peter the Great’s war against Norway (17001721), Charles XII, Augustus the Strong, Stanislavs Leczinsky, Mazeppa, Von Gorz, Brandenburg, Pomerania and Denmark, plus the usual dates. 

After that I landed up in Brazil, read about Bahia tobacco, 
the abundance of coffee and the one and a half million in


habitants of Rio de Janeiro, of Pernambuco and Sao Paulo, 
not forgetting the river Amazon; about Negroes, Mulattos, 
Mestizos, Whites, more than fifty per cent of the population 
being illiterate, and the malaria. As there was still some time 
left, I quickly ran through a family tree. Jan the Elder, 
Willem Lodewijk, Ernst Casimir I, Hendrik Casimir I, right 
up to the little Margriet Franciska (bora in 1943 in Ottawa). 

Twelve o’clock: In the attic, I continued my program with 
the history of the Church-Phew! Till one o’clock. 

Just after two, the poor child sat working (Tim, ’Em!) 
again, this time studying narrow- and broad-nosed monkeys. 
Kitty, tell me quickly how many toes a hippopotamus has! ! 
Then followed the Bible, Noah and the Ark, Shem, Ham, 
and Japheth. After that Charles V. Then with Peter: The 
Colonel, in English by Thackeray. Heard my French verbs 
and then compared the Mississippi with the Missouri. 

I’ve still got a cold and have given it to Margot as well as 
to Mummy and Daddy. As long as Peter doesn’t get it! He 
called me his “Eldorado” and wanted a kiss. Of course, I 
couldn’t! Funny boy! But still, he’s a darling. 

Enough for today, good-by! 

Yours, Anne 

Friday , 28 April , 1944 

Dear Kitty, 

I have never forgotten my dream about Peter Wessel (see 
beginning of January). If I think of it, I can still feel his 
cheek against mine now, and recall that lovely feeling that 
made everything good. 

Sometimes I have had the same feeling here with Peter, but 
never to such an extent, until yesterday, when we were, as 
usual, sitting on the divan, our arms around each other’s 
waists. Then suddenly the ordinary Anne slipped away and 
a second Anne took her place, a second Anne who is not reckless and jocular, but one who just wants to love and be gentle. 

I sat pressed closely against him and felt a wave of emotion 

come over me, tears sprang into my eyes, the left one trickled 
onto his dungarees, the right one ran down my nose and also 
fell onto his dungarees. Did he notice? He made no move or 
sign to show that he did. I wonder if he feels the same as I 
do? He hardly said a word. Does he know that he has two 
Annes before him? These questions must remain unanswered. 

At half past eight I stood up and went to the window, 
where we always say good-by. I was still trembling, I was still 
Anne number two. He came towards me, I flung my arms 
around his neck and gave him a kiss on his left cheek, and was 
about to kiss the other cheek, when my lips met his and we 
pressed them together. In a whirl we were clasped in each 
other s arms, again and again, never to leave off. Oh, Peter 
does so need tenderness. For the first time in his life he has 
discovered a girl, has seen for the first time that even the most 
irritating girls have another side to them, that they have 
hearts and can be different when you are alone with them. 
For the first time in his life he has given of himself and, having never had a boy or girl friend in his life before, shown his 
real self. Now we have found each other. For that matter, I 
didn’t know him either, like him having never had a trusted 
friend, and this is what it has come to. . . . 

Once more there is a question which gives me no peace: "Is 
it right? Is it right that I should have yielded so soon, that I 
am so ardent, just as ardent and eager as Peter himself? May 
I, a girl, let myself go to this extent?” There is but one answer: "I have longed so much and for so long-I am so lonely 
—and now I have found consolation.” 

In the mornings we just behave in an ordinary way, in the 
afternoons more or less so (except just occasionally); but m 
the evenings the suppressed longings of the whole day, the 
happiness and the blissful memories of all the previous occasions come to the surface and we only think of each other. 
Every evening, after the last kiss, I would like to dash away, 
not to look into his eyes any more— away, away, alone in the 
darkness. 

And what do I have to face, when I reach the bottom of 
the staircase? Bright lights, questions, and laughter; I have to 



swallow it all and not show a thing. My heart still feels too 
much; I can t get over a shock such as I received yesterday all 
at once. The Anne who is gentle shows herself too little anyway and, therefore, will not allow herself to be suddenly 
driven into the background. Peter has touched my emotions 
more deeply than anyone has ever done before— except in my 
dreams. Peter has taken possession of me and turned me inside out; surely it goes without saying that anyone would require a rest and a little while to recover from such an 
upheaval? 

Oh Peter, what have you done to me? What do you want 
of me? Where will this lead us? Oh, now I understand Elli; 
now, now that I am going through this myself, now I understand her doubt; if I were older and he should ask me to 
marry him, what should I answer? Anne, be honest! You 
would not be able to marry him, but yet, it would be hard to 
let him go. Peter hasn’t enough character yet, not enough 
will power, too little courage and strength. He is still a child 
in his heart of hearts, he is no older than I am; he is only 
searching for tranquillity and happiness. 

Am I only fourteen? Am I really still a silly little schoolgirl? Am I really so inexperienced about everything? I have 
more experience than most, I have been through things that 
hardly anyone of my age has undergone. I am afraid of myself, I am afraid that in my longing I am giving myself too 
quickly. How, later on, can it ever go right with other boys? 
Oh, it is so difficult, always battling with one’s heart and 
reason; in its own time, each will speak, but do I know for 
certain that I have chosen the right time? 

Yours, Anne 
Tuesday , 2 May, 1944 

Dear Kitty, 

On Saturday evening I asked Peter whether he thought 
that I ought to tell Daddy a bit about us; when we’d discussed it a little, he came to the conclusion that I should. I 
was glad, for it shows that he’s an honest boy. As soon as I 

got downstairs I went off with Daddy to get some water; 
and while we were on the stairs I said, "Daddy, I expect 
youve gathered that when were together Peter and I don’t 
sit miles apart. Do you think it’s wrong?” Daddy didn’t reply 
immediately, then said, "No, I don’t think it’s wrong, but you 
must be careful, Anne, you’re in such a confined space here.” 
When we went upstairs, he said something else on the same 
lines. On Sunday morning he called me to him and said, 
"Anne, I have thought more about what you said.” I felt 
scared already. "It’s not really very right-here in this house; 
I thought that you were just pals. Is Peter in love?” 

“Oh, of course not,” I replied. 

“You know that I understand both of you, but you must 
be the one to hold back. Don’t go upstairs so often, don’t 
encourage him more than you can help. It is the man who is 
always the active one in these things; the woman can hold 
him back. It is quite different under normal circumstances, 
when you are free, you see other boys and girls, you can get 
away sometimes, play games and do all kinds of other things; 
but here, if you’re together a lot, and you want to get away, 
you can’t; you see each other every hour of the day-in fact, 
all the time. Be careful, Anne, and don’t take it too seriously!” 

“I don’t, Daddy, but Peter is a decent boy, really a nice 
boy!” 

“Yes, but he is not a strong character; he can be easily influenced, for good, but also for bad; I hope for his sake that 
his good side will remain uppermost, because, by nature, that 
is how he is.” 

We talked on for a bit and agreed that Daddy should talk 
to him too. 

On Sunday morning in the attic he asked, “And have you 
talked to your father, Anne?” 

“Yes,” I replied, “I’ll tell you about it. Daddy doesn’t think 
it’s bad, but he says that here, where were so close together 
all the time, clashes may easily arise.” 

“But we agreed, didn’t we, never to quarrel; and I’m determined to stick to it!” 

“So will I, Peter, but Daddy didn’t think that it was like 

 

this, he just thought we were pals; do you think that we still 
can be?” 

"I can— what about you?” 

"Me too, I told Daddy that I trusted you. I do trust you, 
Peter, just as much as I trust Daddy, and I believe you to be 
worthy of it. You are, aren't you, Peter?” 

"I hope so.” (He was very shy and rather red in the face.) 

"I believe in you, Peter,” I went on, "I believe that you 
have good qualities, and that you 11 get on in the world.” 

After that, we talked about other things. Later I said, "If 
we come out of here, I know quite well that you won’t bother 
about me any more!” 

He flared right up. "That’s not true, Anne, oh no, I won’t 
let you think that of me!” 

Then I was called away. 

Daddy has talked to him; he told me about it today. ‘"Your 
father thought that the friendship might develop into love 
sooner or later,” he said. But I replied that we would keep a 
check on ourselves. 

Daddy doesn’t want me to go upstairs so much in the evenings now, but I don’t want that. Not only because I like being with Peter; I have told him that I trust him. I do trust 
him and I want to show him that I do, which can’t happen if 
I stay downstairs through lack of trust. 

No, I’m going! 

In the meantime the Dussel drama has righted itself again. 
At supper on Saturday evening he apologized in beautiful 
Dutch. Van Daan was nice about it straight away; it must 
have taken Dussel a whole day to learn that little lesson off 
by heart. 

Sunday, his birthday, passed peacefully. We gave him a 
bottle of good 1919 wine, from the Van Daans (who could 
give their presents now after all) , a bottle of piccalilli and a 
packet of razor blades, a jar of lemon jam from Kraler, a 
book, Little Martin, from Miep, and a plant from Elli. He 
treated each one of us to an egg. 

Yours, Anne 

Wednesday , 3 May , 1944 

Dear Kitty, 

First, just the news of the week. Were having a holiday 
from politics, there is nothing, absolutely nothing to announce. I too am gradually beginning to believe that the invasion will come. After all, they can’t let the Russians clear 
up everything; for that matter, they’re not doing anything 
either at the moment. 

Mr. Koophuis comes to the office every morning again now. 
He’s got a new* spring for Peter’s divan, so Peter will have to 
do some upholstering, about which, quite understandably, he 
doesn’t feel a bit happy. 

Have I told you that Boche has disappeared? Simply vanished— we haven’t seen a sign of her since Thursday of last 
week I expect she’s already in the cats’ heaven, while some 
animal lover is enjoying a succulent meal from her. Perhaps 
some little girl will be given a fur cap out of her skin. Peter 
is very sad about it. 

Since Saturday we’ve changed over, and have lunch at half 
past eleven m the mornings, so we have to last out with one 
cupful of porridge; this saves us a meal Vegetables are still 
very difficult to obtain: we had rotten boiled lettuce this 
afternoon. Ordinary lettuce, spinach, and boiled lettuce, 
there’s nothing else. With these we eat rotten potatoes, so it’s 
a delicious combination! 

As you can easily imagine we often ask ourselves here 
despairingly: “What, oh, what is the use of the war? Why 
can’t people live peacefully together? Why all this destruction?” 

The question is very understandable, but no one has found 
a satisfactory answer to it so far. Yes, why do they make still 
more gigantic planes, still heavier bombs and, at the same 
time, prefabricated houses for reconstruction? Why should 
millions be spent daily on the war and yet there’s not a penny 
available for medical services, artists, or for poor people? 

Why do some people have to starve, while there are sur


pluses rotting in other parts of the world? Oh, why are people 
so crazy? 

I don’t believe that the big men, the politicians and the 
capitalists alone, are guilty of the war. Oh no, the little man is 
just as guilty, otherwise the peoples of the world would have 
risen in revolt long ago! There’s in people simply an urge to 
destroy, an urge to kill, to murder and rage, and until all mankind, without exception, undergoes a great change, wars will 
be waged, everything that has been built up, cultivated, and 
grown will be destroyed and disfigured, after which mankind 
will have to begin all over again. 

I have often been downcast, but never in despair; I regard 
our hiding as a dangerous adventure, romantic and interesting at the same time. In my diary I treat all the privations as 
amusing. I have made up my mind now to lead a different 
life from other girls and, later on, different from ordinary 
housewives. My start has been so very full of interest, and that 
is the sole reason why I have to laugh at the humorous side of 
the most dangerous moments. 

I am young and I possess many buried qualities; I am young 
and strong and am living a great adventure; I am still in the 
midst of it and can’t grumble the whole day long. I have been 
given a lot, a happy nature, a great deal of cheerfulness and 
strength. Every day I feel that I am developing inwardly, that 
the liberation is drawing nearer and how beautiful nature is, 
how good the people are about me, how interesting this adventure is! Why, then, should I be in despair? 

Yours, Anne 

Friday , 5 May , 1944 

Dear Kitty, 

Daddy is not pleased with me; he thought that after our 
talk on Sunday I automatically wouldn’t go upstairs every 
evening. He doesn’t want any "necking,” a word I can’t bear. 
It was bad enough talking about it, why must he make it so 
unpleasant now? I shall talk to him today. Margot has given 

me some good advice, so listen; this is roughly what I want 
to say: 

“I believe, Daddy, that you expect a declaration from me, 
so I will give it you. You are disappointed in me, as you had 
expected more reserve from me, and I suppose you want me to 
be just as a fourteen-year-old should be. But that’s where 
you re mistaken! 

“Since we’ve been here, from July 1942 until a few weeks 
ago, I can assure you that I haven't had an easy time. If 
you only knew how I cried in the evening, how unhappy I 
was, how lonely I felt, then you would understand that I 
want to go upstairs! 

“I have now reached the stage that I can live entirely on 
my own, without Mummy’s support or anyone else’s for that 
matter. But it hasn’t just happened in a night; it’s been a 
bitter, hard struggle and I’ve shed many a tear, before I became as independent as I am now. You can laugh at me and 
not believe me, but that can’t harm me. I know that I’m a 
separate individual and I don’t feel in the least bit responsible 
to any of you. I am only telling you this because I thought 
that otherwise you might think that I was underhand, but I 
don’t have to give an account of my deeds to anyone but myself. 

“When I was in difficulties you all closed your eyes and 
stopped up your ears and didn’t help me; on the contrary, I 
received nothing but warnings not to be so boisterous. I was 
only boisterous so as not to be miserable all the time. I was 
reckless so as not Lo hear that persistent voice within me 
continually. I played a comedy for a year and a half, day in, 
day out, I never grumbled, never lost my cue, nothing like 
that— and now, now the battle is over. I have won! I am independent both in mind and body. I don’t need a mother any 
more, for all this conflict has made me strong. 

“And now, now that I’m on top of it, now that I know 
that I’ve fought the battle, now I want to be able to go on in 
my own way too, the way that I think is right. You can’t and 
mustn’t regard me as fourteen, for all these troubles have 
made me older; I shall not be sorry for what I have done, but 



shall act as I think I can. You can’t coax me into not going 
upstairs; either you forbid it, or you trust me through thick 
and thin, but then leave me in peace as welll” 

Yours, Anne 

Saturday, 6 May , 1944 

Dear Kitty, 

I put a letter, in which I wrote what I explained to you 
yesterday, in Daddy’s pocket before supper yesterday. After 
reading it, he was, according to Margot, very upset for the 
rest of the evening. (I was upstairs doing the dishes.) Poor 
Pirn, I might have known what the effect of such an epistle 
would be. He is so sensitive! I immediately told Peter not to 
ask or say anything more. Pirn hasn’t said any more about it 
to me. Is that yet in store, I wonder? 

Here everything is going on more or less normally again. 
What they tell us about the prices and the people outside is 
almost unbelievable, half a pound of tea costs 350 florins, 1 a 
pound of coffee 80 florins, butter 35 florins per pound, an 
egg 1.45 florin. People pay 14 florins for an ounce of Bulgarian tobacco! Everyone deals in the black market, every 
errand boy has something to offer. Our baker’s boy got hold 
of some sewing silk, 0.9 florin for a thin little skein, the milkman manages to get clandestine ration cards, the undertaker 
delivers the cheese. Burglaries, murders, and theft go on 
daily. The police and night watchmen jain in just as strenuously as the professionals, everyone wants something in their 
empty stomachs and because wage increases are forbidden 
the people simply have to swindle. The police are continually 
on the go, tracing girls of fifteen, sixteen, seventeen and 
older, who are reported missing every day. 

Yours, Anne 

*A florin is equal to approximately twenty-eight cents. 

Sunday morning, 7 May, 1944 

Dear Kitty, 

Daddy and I Rad a long talk yesterday afternoon, I cried 
tembly and Re joined in. Do yon know wRat Re said to me, 
Kitty? “I Rave received many letters in my life, but tins is certainly ffte most unpleasant! You, Anne, wRo Rave received 
sucR love from your parents, you, wRo Rave parents wRo are 
always ready to Relp you, who Rave always defended you 
wRatever it migRt be, can you talk of feeling no responsibility towards us? You feel wronged and deserted; no, Anne, 
you Rave done us a great injustice! 

“Perhaps you didn’t mean it like that, but it is what you 
wrote; no, Anne, we haven’t deserved such a reproach as 
this!” 

OR, I Rave failed miserably; this is certainly the worst thing 
I’ve ever done in my life. I was only trying to show off with 
my crying and my tears, just trying to appear big, so that Re 
would respect me. Certainly, I Rave had a lot of unhappiness, 
but to accuse the good Pirn, who has done and still does do 
everything for me~-no, that was too low for words. 

It’s right that for once I’ve been taken down from my inaccessible pedestal, that my pride has been shaken a bit, for 
I was becoming much too taken up with myself again. What 
Miss Anne does is by no means always right! Anyone who can 
cause such unhappiness to someone else, someone Re professes to love, and on purpose, too, is low, very low! 

And the way Daddy has forgiven me makes me feel more 
than ever ashamed of myself, Re is going to throw the letter 
in the fire and is so sweet to me now, just as if he had done 
something wrong. No, Anne, you still have a tremendous lot 
to learn, begin by doing that first, instead of looking down on 
others and accusing them! 

I have Rad a lot of sorrow, but who hasn’t at my age? I 
Rave played the clown a lot too, but I was hardly conscious 
of it; I felt lonely, but hardly ever in despair! I ought to be 
deeply ashamed of myself, and indeed I am. 

WRat is done cannot be undone, but one can prevent it 



happening again. I want to start from the beginning again 
and it can't be difficult, now that I have Peter. With him to 
support me, I can and will! 

I’m not alone any more; he loves me. I love him, I have my 
books, my storybook and my diary, I’m not so frightfully ugly, 
not utterly stupid, have a cheerful temperament and want to 
have a good character! 

Yes, Anne, you’ve felt deeply that your letter was too hard 
and that it was untrue. To think that you were even proud 
of it! I will take Daddy as my example, and I will improve. 

Yours, Anne 

Monday , 8 May , 1944 

Dear Kitty, 

Have I ever really told you anything about our family? 

I don’t think I have, so I will begin now. My father’s 
parents were very rich. His father had worked himself right 
up and his mother came from a prominent family, who were 
also rich. So in his youth Daddy had a real little rich boy’s 
upbringing, parties every week, balls, festivities, beautiful 
girls, dinners, a large home, etc., etc. 

After Grandpa’s death all the money was lost during the 
World War and the inflation that followed. Daddy was 
therefore extremely well brought up and he laughed very 
much yesterday when, for the first time in his fifty-five years, 
he scraped out the frying pan at table. 

Mummy’s parents were rich too and we often listen openmouthed to stories of engagement parties of two hundred and 
fifty people, private balls and dinners. One certainly could 
not call us rich now, but all my hopes are pinned on after the 
war. 

I can assure you I’m not at all keen on a narrow, cramped 
existence like Mummy and Margot I’d adore to go to Paris 
for a year and London for a year to learn the languages and 
study the history of art. Compare that with Margot, who 

wants to be a midwife in Palestinel I always long to see 
beautiful dresses and interesting people, 

I want to see something of the world and do all kinds of 
exciting things. I’ve already told you this before. And a little 
money as well won't do any harm. 

Miep told us this morning about a party she went to, to 
celebrate an engagement. Both the future bride and bridegroom came from rich families and everything was very 
grand. Miep made our mouths water telling us about the food 
they had: vegetable soup with minced meat balls in it, cheese, 
rolls, hors d’oeuvre with eggs and roast beef, fancy cakes, 
wine and cigarettes, as much as you wanted of everything 
(black market). Miep had ten drinks— can that be the 
woman who calls herself a teetotaler? If Miep had all those, 
I wonder however many her spouse managed to knock back? 
Naturally, everyone at the party was a bit tipsy. There were 
two policemen from the fighting squad, who tooks photos of 
the engaged couple. It seems as if we are never far from 
Miep’s thoughts, because she took down the addresses of 
these men at once, in case anything should happen at 
some time or other, and good Dutchmen might come in 
useful. 

She made our mouths water. We, who get nothing but two 
spoonfuls of porridge for our breakfast and whose tummies 
were so empty that they were positively rattling, we, who get 
nothing but half-cooked spinach (to preserve the vitamins) 
and rotten potatoes day after day, we, who get nothing but 
lettuce, cooked or raw, spinach and yet again spinach in our 
hollow stomachs. Perhaps we may yet grow to be as strong as 
Popeye, although I don't see much sign of it at presentl 

If Miep had taken us to the party we shouldn't have left 
any rolls for the other guests. I can tell you, we positively 
drew the words from Miep's lips, we gathered round her, as if 
we’d never heard about delicious food or smart people in our 
lives before! 

And these are the granddaughters of a millionaire. The 
world is a queer place! 

Yours, Anne 



Tuesday , 9 May , 1944 

Dear Kitty, 

I’ve finished my story of Ellen the fairy. I have copied it 
out on nice note paper. It certainly looks very attractive, but 
is it really enough for Daddy’s birthday? I don’t know. 
Margot and Mummy have both written poems for him. 

Mr. Kraler came upstairs this afternoon with the news that 
Mrs. B., who used to act as demonstrator for the business, 
wants to eat her box lunch in the office here at two o’clock 
every afternoon. Think of itS No one can come upstairs any 
more, the potatoes cannot be delivered, Elli can’t have any 
lunch, we can’t go to the W.C., we mustn’t move, etc., etc. 
We thought up the wildest and most varied suggestions to 
wheedle her away. Van Daan thought that a good laxative in 
her coffee would be sufficient. “No,” replied Koophuis, “I beg 
of you not, then we’d never get her off the boxl” Resounding 
laughter. “Off the box,” asked Mrs. Van Daan, “what does 
that mean?” An explanation followed. “Can I always use it?” 
she then asked stupidly. “Imagine it,” Elli giggled, “if one 
asked for the box in Bijenkorf’s 1 they wouldn’t even understand what you mean!” 

Oh, Kit, it’s such wonderful weather, if only I could go 
outdoorsl 

Yours, Anne 

Wednesday , 10 May , 1944 

Dear Kitty, 

We were sitting in the attic doing some French yesterday 
afternoon when I suddenly heard water pattering down behind me. I asked Peter what it could be, but he didn’t even 
reply, simply tore up to the loft, where the source of the 
disaster was, and pushed Mouschi, who, because of the wet 
earth box, had sat down beside it, harshly back to the right 

1 “Bijenkorf” is a large store in Amsterdam. 

THE DIARY OF A YOUNG GIRL 205 

place. A great din and disturbance followed, and Mouschi, 
who had finished by that time, dashed downstairs. 

Mouschi, seeking the convenience of something similar to 
his box, had chosen some wood shavings. The pool had 
trickled down from the loft into the attic immediately and, 
unfortunately, landed just beside and in the barrel of potatoes. 
The ceiling was dripping, and as the attic floor is not free from 
holes either, several yellow drips came through the ceiling 
into the dining room between a pile of stockings and some 
books, which were lying on the table. I was doubled up with 
laughter, it really was a scream. There was Mouschi crouching 
under a chair, Peter with water, bleaching powder, and floor 
cloth, and Van Daan trying to soothe everyone. The calamity 
was soon over, but its a well-known fact that cats’ puddles 
positively stink. The potatoes proved this only too clearly and 
also the wood shavings that Daddy collected in a bucket to 
be burned. Poor Mouschi! How were you to know that peat is 
unobtainable? 

Yours, Anne 

P.S. Our beloved Queen spoke to us yesterday and this 
evening. She is taking a holiday in order to be strong for her 
return to Holland. She used words like “soon, when I am 
back, speedy liberation, heroism, and heavy burdens.” 

A speech by Gerbrandy followed. A clergyman concluded 
with a prayer to God to take care of the Jews, the people in 
concentration camps, in prisons, and in Germany. 

Yours, Anne 

Thursday, 11 May, 1944 

Dear Kitty, 

I’m frightfully busy at the moment, and although it sounds 
mad, I haven’t time to get through my pile of work. Shall I 
tell you briefly what I have got to do? Well, then, by tomorrow I must finish reading the first part of Galileo Galilei, 
as it has to be returned to the library. I only started it yesterday, but I shall manage it. 

Next week I have got to read Palestine at the Crossroads 



and the second part of Galilei. Next I finished reading the 
first part of the biography of The Emperor Charles V yesterday, and it’s essential that I work out all the diagrams and 
family trees that I have collected from it. After that I have 
three pages of foreign words gathered from various books, 
which have all got to be recited, written down, and learned. 
Number four is that my film stars are all mixed up together 
and are simply gasping to be tidied up; however, as such a 
clearance would take several days, and since Professor Anne, 
as she’s already said, is choked with work, the chaos will have 
to remain a chaos. 

Next Theseus, Oedipus, Peleus, Orpheus, Jason, and 
Hercules are all awaiting their turn to be arranged, as their 
different deeds lie crisscross in my mind like fancy threads in 
a dress; it’s also high time Myron and Phidias had some treatment, if they wish to remain at all coherent. Likewise it’s the 
same with the seven and nine years’ war; I’m mixing everything up together at this rate. Yes, but what can one do with 
such a memory! Think how forgetful I shall be when I’m 
eighty! 

Oh, something else, the Bible; how long is it still going to 
take before I meet the bathing Susanna? And what do they 
mean by the guilt of Sodom and Gomorrah? Oh, there is still 
such a terrible lot to find out and to learn. And in the meantime I’ve left Lisolette of the Pfalz completely in the lurch. 

Kitty, can you see that I’m just about bursting? 

Now, about something else: you’ve known for a long time 
that my greatest wish is to become a journalist someday and 
later on a famous writer. Whether these leanings towards 
greatness (or insanity?) will ever materialize remains to be 
seen, but I certainly have the subjects in my mind. In any 
case, I want to publish a book entitled Het Achterhuis after 
the war. Whether I shall succeed or not, I cannot say, but 
my diary will be a great help. I have other ideas as well, besides Het Achterhuis. But I will write more fully about them 
some other time, when they have taken a clearer form in my 
mind. 

Yours, Anne 

Saturday , 13 May , 1944 

Dearest Kitty, 

It was Daddy s birthday yesterday. Mummy and Daddy 
have been married nineteen years. The charwoman wasn't 
below and the sun shone as it has never shone before in 1944. 
Our horse chestnut is in full bloom, thickly covered with 
leaves and much more beautiful than last year. 

Daddy received a biography of the life of Linnaeus from 
Koophuis, a book on nature from Kraler, Amsterdam by the 
Water from Dussel, a gigantic box from Van Daan, beautifully done up and almost professionally decorated, containing 
three eggs, a bottle of beer, a bottle of yoghourt, and a green 
tie. It made our pot of syrup seem rather small. My roses 
smelled lovely compared with Miep’s and Ellis carnations, 
which had no smell, but were very pretty too. He was certainly spoiled. Fifty fancy pastries have arrived, heavenly! 
Daddy himself treated us to spiced gingerbread, beer for the 
gentlemen, and yoghourt for the ladies. Enjoyment all around! 

Yours, Anne 

Tuesday , 16 May , 1944 

Dearest Kitty, 

Just for a change, as we haven't talked about them for so 
long, I want to tell you a little discussion that went on between Mr. and Mrs. Van Daan yesterday. 

Mrs. Van Daan: “The Germans are sure to have made the 
Atlantic Wall very strong indeed, they will certainly do all in 
their power to hold back the English. It’s amazing how strong 
the Germans are!” 

Mr. Van Daan: “Oh yes, incredibly.” 

Mrs. Van Daan: “Ye-es.” 

Mr. Van Daan: “The Germans are so strong they're sure 
to win the war in the end, in spite of everything!” 



Mrs. Van Daan: “Its quite possible, Fm not convinced of 
the opposite yet.” 

Mr. Van Daan: “I won t bother to reply any more.” 

Mrs. Van Daan: “Still you always do answer me, you can’t 
resist capping me every time.” 

Mr. Van Daan: “Of course not, but my replies are the bare 
minimum.” 

Mrs Van Daan: “But still you do reply, and you always 
have to be in the right! Your prophecies don’t always come 
true by a long shot.” 

Mr. Van Daan: ‘They have up till now.” 

Mrs. Van Daan: “That’s not true. The invasion was to have 
come last year, and the Firms were to have been out of the 
war by now. Italy was finished in the winter, but the Russians 
would already have Lemberg; oh, no, I don’t think much of 
your prophecies.” 

Mr. Van Daan (standing up): “It’s about time you shut 
your mouth. One day I’ll show you that I’m right; sooner or 
later you’ll get enough of it. I can’t bear any more of your 
grousing. You’re so infuriating but you’ll stew in your own 
juice one day.” 

End of Part I. 

I really couldn’t help laughing. Mummy too, while Peter 
sat biting his lip. Oh, those stupid grownups, they’d do better 
to start learning themselves, before they have so much to say 
to the younger generation! 

Yours, Anne 

Friday , 19 May , 1944 

Dear Kitty, 

I felt rotten yesterday, really out of sorts (unusual for 
Anne!), with tummy-ache and every other imaginable misery. 
Tm much better again today, feel very hungry, but I’d better 
not touch the kidney beans we’re having today. 

All goes well with Peter and me. The poor boy seems to 
need a little love even more than I do. He blushes every eve

THE DIAKY OF A YOUNG GIRL 



ning when he gets his good-night kiss and simply begs for 
another. I wonder if I'm a good substitute for Boche? I don’t 
mind, he is so happy now that he knows that someone loves 
him. 

After my laborious conquest IVe got the situation a bit 
more in hand now, but I don’t think my love has cooled off. 
He’s a darling, but I soon closed up my inner self from him. 
If he wants to force the lock again he’ll have to work a good 
deal harder than before! 

Yours, Anne 

Saturday, 20 May, 1944 

Dear Kitty, 

Last evening I came downstairs from the attic and as I 
entered the room saw at once the lovely vase of carnations 
lying on the floor, Mummy down on hands and knees mopping up and Margot fishing up some papers from the floor. 

“What’s happened here?” I asked, full of misgivings and, 
not even waiting for their answer, tried to sum up the damage 
from a distance. My whole portfolio of family trees, writing 
books, textbooks, everything was soaked. I nearly wept and 
was so worked up that I can hardly remember what I said, 
but Margot said that I let fly something about “incalculable 
loss, frightful, terrible, can never be repaired,” and still more. 
Daddy burst out laughing, Mummy and Margot joined in, 
but I could have cried over all the toil that was wasted, and 
the diagrams I’d so carefully worked out. 

On closer inspection the “incalculable loss” didn’t turn out 
to be as bad as I’d thought. I carefully sorted out all the 
papers that were stuck together and separated them in the 
attic. After that I hung them all up on the clothes lines to 
■dry. It was a funny sight and I couldn’t help laughing myself. 
Maria de Medici beside Charles V, William of Orange and 
Marie Antoinette; it’s a “racial outrage,” was Mr. Van 
Daan’s joke on the subject. After I’d entrusted my papers into 
Peter’s care I went downstairs again. 

X0 

"‘Which books are spoiled?” I asked Margot, who was 
checking up on them. “Algebra,” she said. I hurried to her 
side, but unfortunately not even the algebra book was spoiled. 
I wish it had fallen right in the vase; I’ve never loathed any 
other book so much as that one. There are the names of at 
least twenty girls in the front, all previous owners; it is old, 
yellow, full of scribbles and improvements. If I’m ever in 
a really very wicked mood, I’ll tear the blasted thing to 
pieces! 

Yours, Anne 

Monday , 22 May, 1944 

Dear Kitty, 

On May 20th Daddy lost five bottles of yoghourt on a bet 
with Mrs. Van Daan. The invasion still hasn’t come yet; it’s 
no exaggeration to say that all Amsterdam, all Holland, yes, 
the whole west coast of Europe, right down to Spain, talks 
about the invasion day and night, debates about it, and 
makes bets on it and . . . hopes. 

The suspense is rising to a climax. By no means everyone 
we had regarded as “good” Dutch have stuck to their faith 
in the English; by no means everyone thinks the English bluff 
a masterly piece of strategy, oh no, the people want to see 
deeds at last, great, heroic deeds. Nobody sees beyond his 
own nose, no one thinks that the English are fighting for their 
own land and their own people, everyone thinks that it’s their 
duty to save Holland, as quickly and as well as they can. 

What obligations have the English towards us? How have 
the Dutch earned the generous help that they seem so explicitly to expect? Oh no, the Dutch will have made a big 
mistake, the English, in spite of all their bluff, are certainly 
no more to blame than all the other countries, great and 
small, which are not under occupation. The English really 
won’t offer us their apologies, for even if we do reproach 
them for being asleep during the years when Germany was rearming, we cannot deny that all the other countries, especially 

those bordering Germany, also slept. We shan’t get anywhere 
by following an ostrich policy. England and the whole world 
have seen that only too well now, and that is why, one by 
one, England, no less than the rest, will have to make heavy 
sacrifices. 

No country is going to sacrifice its men for nothing and 
certainly not in the interests of another. England is not going 
to do that either. The invasion, with liberation and freedom, 
will come sometime, but England and America will appoint 
the day, not all the occupied countries put together. 

To our great horror and regret we hear that the attitude 
of a great many people towards us Jews has changed. We 
hear that there is anti-Semitism now in circles that never 
thought of it before. This news has affected us all very, very 
deeply. The cause of this hatred of the Jews is understandable, even human sometimes, but not good. The Christians 
blame the Jews for giving secrets away to the Germans, for 
betraying their helpers and for the fact that, through the Jews 
a great many Christians have gone the way of so many others 
before them, and suffered terrible punishments and a dreadful fate. 

This is all true, but one must always look at these things 
from both sides. Would Christians behave differently in 
our place? The Germans have a means of making people 
talk. Can a person, entirely at their mercy, whether Jew or 
Christian, always remain silent? Everyone knows that is practically impossible. Why, then, should people demand the 
impossible of the Jews? 

It’s being murmured in underground circles that the German Jews who emigrated to Holland and who are now in 
Poland may not be allowed to return here; they once had 
the right of asylum in Holland, but when Hitler has gone 
they will have to go back to Germany again. 

When one hears this one naturally wonders why we are 
carrying on with this long and difficult war. We always hear 
that were all fighting together for freedom, truth, and right! 
Is discord going to show itself while we are still fighting, is 
the Jew once again worth less than another? Oh, it is sad, 



very sad, that once more, for the umpteenth time, the old 
truth is confirmed: “What one Christian does is his own 
responsibility, what one Jew does is thrown back at all 
Jews.” 

Quite honestly, I can't understand that the Dutch, who 
are such a good, honest, upright people, should judge us like 
this, we, the most oppressed, the unhappiest, perhaps the 
most pitiful of all peoples of the whole world. 

I hope one thing only, and that is that this hatred of the 
Jews will be a passing thing, that the Dutch will show what 
they are after all, and that they will never totter and lose 
their sense of right. For anti-Semitism is unjust! 

And if this terrible threat should actually come true, then 
the pitiful little collection of Jews that remain will have to 
leave Holland. We, too, shall have to move on again with 
our little bundles, and leave this beautiful country, which 
offered us such a warm welcome and which now turns its 
back on us. 

I love Holland. I who, having no native country, had hoped 
that it might become my fatherland, and I still hope it 
will! 

Yours, Anne 

Thursday , 25 May , 1944 

Dear Kitty, 

There’s something fresh every day. This morning our vegetable man was picked up for having two Jews in his house. 
It's a great blow to us, not only that those poor Jews are 
balancing on the edge of an abyss, but it's terrible for the 
man himself. 

The world has turned topsy-turvy, respectable people are 
being sent off to concentration camps, prisons, and lonely 
cells, and the dregs that remain govern young and old, rich 
and poor. One person walks into the trap through the black 
market, a second through helping the Jews or other people 
who Ve had to go “underground”; anyone who isn’t a mem

ber of the N.S.B. doesn’t know what may happen to him 
from one day to another. 

This man is a great loss to us too. The girls can’t and aren’t 
allowed to haul along our share of potatoes, so the only 
thing to do is to eat less. I will tell you how we shall do that; 
it’s certainly not going to make things any pleasanter. 
Mummy says we shall cut out breakfast altogether, have 
porridge and bread for lunch, and for supper fried potatoes 
and possibly once or twice per week vegetables or lettuce, 
nothing more. Were going to be hungry, but anything is 
better than being discovered. 

Yours, Anne 

Friday , 26 May, 1944 

Dear Kitty, 

At last, at last I can sit quietly at my table in front of a 
crack of window and write you everything. 

I feel so miserable, I haven’t felt like this for months; even 
after the burglary I didn’t feel so utterly broken. On the 
one hand, the vegetable man, the Jewish question, which 
is being discussed minutely over the whole house, the invasion delay, the bad food, the strain, the miserable atmosphere, my disappointment in Peter; and on the other hand, 
Elli’s engagement, Whitsun reception, flowers, Kraler’s 
birthday, fancy cakes, and stories about cabarets, films, and 
concerts. That difference, that huge difference, it’s always 
there; one day we laugh and see the funny side of the situation, but the next we are afraid, fear, suspense, and despair 
staring from our faces. Miep and Kraler carry the heaviest 
[burden of the eight in hiding, Miep in all she does, and 
Kraler through the enormous responsibility, which is sometimes so much for him that he can hardly talk from pent-up 
nerves and strain. Koophuis and Elli look after us well too, 
but they can forget us at times, even if it’s only for a few 
hours, or a day, or even two days. They have their own worries, Koophuis over his health, Elli over her engagement, 



which is not altogether rosy, but they also have their little outings, visits to friends, and the whole life of ordinary people. 
For them the suspense is sometimes lifted, even if it is only for 
a short time, but for us it never lifts for a moment. We’ve been 
here for two years now; how long have we still to put up with 
this almost unbearable, ever increasing pressure? 

The sewer is blocked, so we mustn’t run water, or rather 
only a trickle; when we go to the W.C. we have to take a lavatory brush with us, and we keep dirty water in a large Cologne 
pot. We can manage for today, but what do we do if the 
plumber can’t do the job alone? The municipal scavenging 
service doesn’t come until Tuesday, 

Miep sent us a currant cake, made up in the shape of a doll, 
with the words “Happy Whitsun” on the note attached to it. 
It’s almost as if she’s ridiculing us; our present frame of mind 
and our uneasiness could hardly be called “happy.” The affair 
of the vegetable man has made us more nervous, you hear 
“shh, shh” from all sides again, and we re being quieter over 
everything. The police forced the door there, so they could do 
it to us tool If one day we too should ... no, I mustn’t write 
it, but I can’t put the question out of my mind today. On the 
contrary, all the fear I’ve already been through seems to face 
me again in all its frightfulness. 

This evening at eight o’clock I had to go to the downstairs 
lavatory all alone; there was no one down there, as everyone 
was listening to the radio; I wanted to be brave, but it was 
difficult. I always feel much safer here upstairs than alone 
downstairs in that large, silent house; alone with the mysterious muffled noises from upstairs and the tooting of motor 
horns in the street. I have to hurry for I start to quiver if I begin thinking about the situation. 

Again and again I ask myself, would it not have been better 
for us all if we had not gone into hiding, and if we were dead 
now and not going through all this misery, especially as we 
shouldn’t be running our protectors into danger any more. But 
we all recoil from these thoughts too, for we still love life; we 
haven’t yet forgotten the voice of nature, we still hope, hope 
about everything. I hope something will happen soon now, 

shooting if need be^nothing can crush us more than this restlessness. Let the end come, even if it is hard; then at least we 
shall know whether we axe finally going to win through or go 
under. 

Yours, Anne 

Wednesday, SI May, 1944 

Dear Kitty, 

It was so frightfully hot on Saturday, Sunday, Monday, and 
Tuesday that I simply couldn’t hold a fountain pen in my 
hand. That’s why it was impossible to write to you. The drains 
went phut again on Friday, were mended again on Saturday; 
Mr. Koophuis came to see us in the afternoon and told us 
masses about Corry and her being in the same hockey club as 
Jopie. 

On Sunday Elli came to make sure no one had broken in 
and stayed for breakfast, on Whit Monday Mr. Van Santen 
acted as the hide-out watchman, and, finally, on Tuesday the 
windows could be opened again at last. 

There’s seldom been such a beautiful, warm, one can even 
say hot, Whitsun. The heat here in the “Secret Annexe” is terrible; I will briefly describe these warm days by giving you a 
sample of the sort of complaints that arise: 

Saturday: “Lovely, what perfect weather,” we all said in 
the morning. “If only it wasn’t quite so warm,” in the afternoon when the windows had to be closed. 

Sunday: “It’s positively unbearable, this heat. The butter’s 
melting, there’s not a cool spot anywhere in the house, the 
bread’s getting so dry, the milk’s going sour, windows can’t 
be opened, and we, wretched outcasts, sit here suffocating 
while other people enjoy their Whitsun holiday.” 

Monday: “My feet hurt me, I haven’t got any thin clothes. 
I can’t wash the dishes in this heat,” all this from Mrs. Van 
Daan. It was extremely unpleasant. 

I still can’t put up with heat and am glad that there’ s a stiff 
breeze today, and yet the sun still shines. 

Yours, Anne 



Monday , 5 June , 1944 

Dear Kitty, 

Fresh "Secret Annexe” troubles, a quarrel between Dussel 
and the Franks over something very trivial, the sharing out 
of the butter DusseFs capitulation. Mrs. Van Daan and the 
latter very thick, flirtations, kisses and friendly little laughs. 
Dussel is beginning to get longings for women. The Fifth 
Army has taken Rome. The city has been spared devastation 
by both armies and air forces, and is undamaged. Very few 
vegetables and potatoes. Bad weather. Heavy bombardments 
against the French coast and Pas de Calais continue. 

Yours, Anne 

Tuesday , 6 June , 1944 

Dear Kitty, 

"This is D-day,” came the announcement over the English 
news and quite rightly, "this is the day/ 51 The invasion has 
begun! 

The English gave the news at eight o’clock this morning: 
Calais, Boulogne, Le Havre, and Cherbourg, also the Pas de 
Calais (as usual), were heavily bombarded. Moreover, as a 
safety measure for all occupied territories, all people who live 
within a radius of thirty-five kilometers from the coast axe 
warned to be prepared for bombardments. If possible, the 
English will drop pamphlets one hour beforehand. 

According to German news, English parachute troops have 
landed on the French coast, English landing craft are in battle 
with the German Navy, says the B.B.C. 

We discussed it over the “Annexe” breakfast at nine o’clock: 
Is this just a trial landing like Dieppe two years ago? 

English broadcast in German, Dutch, French, and other 
languages at ten o’clock: “The invasion has begun!”~that 
means the “real” invasion. English broadcast in German at 
eleven o’clock, speech by the Supreme Commander, General 
Dwight Eisenhower. 

1 Ongmal English. 

The English news at twelve o’clock in English; “This is 
D-day.” General Eisenhower said to the French people: “Stiff 
fighting will come now, but after this the victory. The year 
1944 is the year of complete victory; good luck.” 1 

English news in English at one o’clock (translated) ; 11,000 
planes stand ready, and are flying to and fro non-stop, landing troops and attacking behind the lines; 4000 landing boats, 
plus small craft, are landing troops and materiel between 
Cherbourg and Le Havre incessantly. English and Am erican 
troops are already engaged in hard fighting. Speeches by Gerbrandy, by the Prime Minister of Belgium, King Haakon of 
Norway, De Gaulle of France, the King of England, and last, 
but not least, Churchill. 

Great commotion in the “Secret Annexe”! Would the longawaited liberation that has been talked of so much, but which 
still seems too wonderful, too much like a fairy tale, ever come 
true? Could we be granted victory this year, 1944? We don’t 
know yet, but hope is revived within us; it gives us fresh courage, and makes us strong again. Since we must put up bravely 
with all the fears, privations, and sufferings, the great thing 
now is to remain calm and steadfast. Now more than ever we 
must clench our teeth and not cry out. France, Russia, Italy, 
and Germany, too, can all cry out and give vent to their 
misery, but we haven’t the right to do that yet! 

Oh, Kitty, the best part of the invasion is that I have the 
feeling that friends are approaching. We have been oppressed 
by those terrible Germans for so long, they have had their 
knives so at our throats, that the thoughts of friends and delivery fills us with confidence! 

Now it doesn’t concern the Jews any more; no, it concerns 
Holland and all occupied Europe. Perhaps, Margot says, I 
may yet be able to go back to school in September or October. 

Yours, Anne 

P.S. I’ll keep you up to date with all the latest newsl 

Anginal English. 



Friday, 9 June , 1944 

Dear Kitty, 

Super news of the invasion. The Allies have taken Bayeux, 
a small village on the French coast, and are now fighting for 
Caen. It’s obvious that they intend to cut off the peninsular 
where Cherbourg lies. Every evening war correspondents give 
news from the battle front, telling us of the difficulties, courage, and enthusiasm of the army; they manage to get hold of 
the most incredible stories. Also some of the wounded who 
are already back in England again came to the microphone. 
The air force are up all the time in spite of the miserable 
weather. We heard over the B.B.C. that Churchill wanted to 
land with the troops on D-day, however, Eisenhower and the 
other generals managed to get him out of the idea. Just think 
of it, what pluck he has for such an old man-he must be 
seventy at least. 

The excitement here has worn off a bit; still, we re hoping 
that the war will be over at the end of this year. It’ll be about 
time too! Mrs. Van Daan’s grizzling is absolutely unbearable; 
now she can’t any longer drive us crazy over the invasion, she 
nags us the whole day long about the bad weather. It really 
would be nice to dump her in a bucket of cold water and put 
her up in the loft. 

The whole of the “Secret Annexe” except Van Daan and 
Peter have read the trilogy Hungarian Rhapsody. This book 
deals with the life history of the composer, virtuoso, and child 
prodigy, Franz Liszt. It is a very interesting book, but in my 
opinion there is a bit too much about women in it. In his time 
Liszt was not only the greatest and most famous pianist, but 
also the greatest ladies’ man-right up to the age of seventy. 
He lived with the Duchess Marie d’Agould, Princess Caroline 
Sayn-Wittgenstein, the dancer Lola Montez, the pianist Agnes 
Kingworth, the pianist Sophie Menter, Princess Olga Janina, 
Baroness Olga Meyendorff, the actress Lilia what’s-her-name, 
etc., etc.; it is just endless. The parts of the book that deal 
with music and art are much more interesting. Among those 
mentioned are Schumann, Clara Wieck, Hector Berlioz, 

Johannes Brahms, Beethoven, Joachim, Richard Wagner, 
Hans von Bulow, Anton Rubinstein, Frederic Chopin, Victor 
Hugo, Honore de Balzac, Hiller, Hummel, Czerny, Rossini, 
Cherubini, Paganini, Mendelssohn, etc., etc. 

Liszt was personally a fine man, very generous, and modest 
about himself though exceptionally vain. He helped everyone, 
his art was everything to him, he was mad about cognac and 
about women, could not bear to see tears, was a gentleman, 
would never refuse to do anyone a favor, didn’t care about 
money, loved religious liberty and world freedom. 

Yours, Anne 

Tuesday , IS June , 1944 

Dear Kitty, 

Another birthday has gone by, so now Fm fifteen. I received quite a lot of presents. 

All five parts of Sprenger’s History of Art , a set of underwear, a handkerchief, two bottles of yoghourt, a pot of jam, a 
spiced gingerbread cake, and a book on botany from Mummy 
and Daddy, a double bracelet from Margot, a book from the 
Van Daans, sweet peas from Dussel, sweets and exercise 
books from Miep and Elli and, the high spot of all, the book 
Maria Theresa and three slices of full-cream cheese from Kraler. A lovely bunch of peonies from Peter; the poor boy took a 
lot of trouble to try and find something, but didn’t have any 
luck. 

There’s still excellent news of the invasion, in spite of the 
wretched weather, countless gales, heavy rains, and high seas. 

Yesterday Churchill, Smuts, Eisenhower, and Arnold visited 
French villages which have been conquered and liberated. 
The torpedo boat that Churchill was in shelled the coast. He 
appears, like so many men, not to know what fear is— makes 
me envious! 

It’s difficult for us to judge from our secret redoubt how 
people outside have reacted to the news. Undoubtedly people 
are pleased that the idle (?) English have rolled up their 



sleeves and are doing something at last. Any Dutch people 
who still look down on the English, scoff at England and her 
government of old gentlemen, call the English cowards, and 
yet hate the Germans deserve a good shaking. Perhaps it 
would put some sense into their woolly brains. 

I hadn’t had a period for over two months, but it finally 
started again on Saturday. Still, in spite of all the unpleasantness and bother, I’m glad it hasn’t failed me any longer. 

Yours, Anne 

Wednesday , 14 June, 1944 

Dear Kitty, 

My head is haunted by so many wishes and thoughts, accusations and reproaches. I’m really not as conceited as so many 
people seem to think, I know my own faults and shortcomings 
better than anyone, but the difference is that I also know that 
I want to improve, shall improve, and have already improved 
a great deal. 

Why is it then, I so often ask myself, that everyone still 
thinks I’m so terribly knowing and forward? Am I so knowing? 
Is it that I really am, or that maybe the others aren’t? That 
sounds queer, I realize now, but I shan’t cross out the last sentence, because it really isn’t so crazy. Everyone knows that 
Mrs. Van Daan, one of my chief accusers, is unintelligent. I 
might as well put it plainly and say "stupid.” Stupid people 
usually can’t take it if others do better than they do. 

Mrs. Van Daan thinks I’m stupid because I’m not quite so 
lacking in intelligence as she is; she thinks I’m forward because she’s even more so; she thinks my dresses are too short, 
because hers are even shorter. And that’s also the reason that 
she thinks I’m knowing, because she’s twice as bad about joining in over subjects she knows absolutely nothing about. But 
one of my favorite sayings is "There’s no smoke without fire,” 
and I readily admit that I’m knowing. 

Now the trying part about me is that I criticize and scold 
myself far more than anyone else does. Then if Mummy adds 

her bit of advice the pile of sermons becomes so insurmountable that in my despair I become rude and start contradicting 
and then, of course, the old well-known Anne watchword 
comes back: “No one understands me!” This phrase sticks in 
my mind; I know it sounds silly, yet there is some truth in it. I 
often accuse myself to such an extent that I simply long for a 
word of comfort, for someone who could give me sound advice and also draw out some of my real self; but, alas, I keep 
on looking, but I haven't found anyone yet. 

I know that you'll immediately think of Peter, won’t you, 
Kit? It's like this: Peter loves me not as a lover but as a friend 
and grows more affectionate every day. But what is the mysterious something that holds us both back? I don't understand 
it myself. Sometimes I think that my terrible longing for him 
was exaggerated, yet that's really not it, because if I don't go 
up to see him for two days, then I long for him more desperately than ever before. Peter is good and he's a darling, but 
still there's no denying that there’s a lot about him that disappoints me. Especially his dislike of religion and all his talk 
about food and various other things don't appeal to me. Yet I 
feel quite convinced that we shall never quarrel now that 
we've made that straightforward agreement together. Pete is a 
peace-loving person; he’s tolerant and gives in very easily. He 
lets me say a lot of things to him that he would never accept 
from his mother, he tries most persistently to keep his things 
in order. And yet why should he keep his innermost self to 
himself and why am I never allowed there? By nature he is 
more closed-up than I am, I agree, but I know-and from my 
own experience-that at some time or other even the most uncommunicative people long just as much, if not more, to find 
someone in whom they can confide. 

Both Peter and I have spent our most meditative years in 
the “Secret Annexe.” We often discuss the future, the past, 
and the present, but, as I've already said, I still seem to miss 
the real thing and yet I know that it's there. 

Yours, Anne 



Thursday , 15 June , 1944 



Dear Kitty, 

I wonder if it's because I haven't been able to poke my nose 
outdoors for so long that I’ve grown so crazy about everything 
to do with nature? I can perfectly well remember that there 
was a time when a deep blue sky, the song of the birds, moonlight and flowers could never have kept me spellbound. Thats 
changed since I’ve been here. 

At Whitsun, for instance, when it was so warm, I stayed 
awake on purpose until half past eleven one evening in order 
to have a good look at the moon for once by myself. Alas, the 
sacrifice was all in vain, as the moon gave far too much light 
and I didn’t dare risk opening a window. Another time, some 
months ago now, I happened to be upstairs one evening when 
the window was open. I didn’t go downstairs until the window 
had to be shut. The dark, rainy evening, the gale, the scudding clouds held me entirely in their power; it was the first 
time in a year and a half that I’d seen the night face to face. 
After that evening my longing to see it again was greater than 
my fear of burglars, rats, and raids on the house. I went downstairs all by myself and looked outside through the windows 
in the kitchen and the private office. A lot of people are fond 
of nature, many sleep outdoors occasionally, and people in 
prisons and hospitals long for the day when they will be free 
to enjoy the beauties of nature, but few are so shut away and 
isolated from that which can be shared alike by rich and poor. 
It’s not imagination on my part when I say that to look up at 
the sky, the clouds, the moon, and the stars makes me calm 
and patient. It’s a better medicine than either Valerian or 
bromine, Mother Nature makes me humble and prepared to 
face every blow courageously. 

Alas, it has had to be that I am only able— except on a few 
rare occasions-to look at nature through dirty net curtains 
hanging before very dusty windows. And it’s no pleasure looking through these any longer, because nature is just the one 
thing that really must be unadulterated. 

Yours, Anne 

m 

Friday, 16 June , 1944 

Dear Kitty, 

New problems: Mrs. Van Daan is desperate, talks about a 
bullet through her head, prison, hanging, and suicide. She’s 
jealous that Peter confides in me and not her. She’s offended 
that Dussel doesn’t enter into her flirtations with him, as she’d 
hoped, afraid that her husband is smoking all the fur-coat 
money away, she quarrels, uses abusive language, cries, pities 
herself, laughs, and then starts a fresh quarrel again. What on 
earth can one do with such a foolish, blubbering specimen? 
No one takes her seriously, she hasn’t any character, and she 
grumbles to everyone. The worst of it is that it makes Peter 
rude, Mr. Van Daan irritable, and Mummy cynical. Yes, it’s a 
frightful situation! There’s one golden rale to keep before 
you: laugh about everything and don’t bother yourself about 
the others! It sounds selfish, but it’s honestly the only cure for 
anyone who has to seek consolation in himself. 

Kraler has received another call-up to go digging for four 
weeks. He’s trying to get out of it with a doctor’s certificate 
and a letter from the business. Koophuis wants to have an 
operation on his stomach. All private telephones were cut off 
at eleven o’clock yesterday. 

Yours, Anne 

Friday , 23 June, 1944 

Dear Kitty, 

Nothing special going on here. The English have begun 
their big attack on Cherbourg; according to Pirn and Van 
Daan, were sure to be free by October 10. The Russians are 
taking part in the campaign, and yesterday began their offensive near Vitebsk; it’s exactly three years to a day since the 
Germans attacked. We’ve hardly got any potatoes; from now 
on we’re going to count them out for each person, then everyone knows what he’s getting. 

Yours, Anne 



Tuesday , 27 June , 1944 

Dearest Kitty, 

The mood has changed, everything's going wonderfully. 
Cherbourg, Vitebsk, and Sloben fell today. Lots of prisoners 
and booty. Now the English can land what they want now 
they’ve got a harbor, the whole Cotentin Peninsular three 
weeks after the English invasion! A tremendous achievement! 
In the three weeks since D-day not a day has gone by without 
rain and gales, both here and in France, but a bit of bad luck 
didn’t prevent the English and Americans from showing their 
enormous strength, and how! Certainly the “wonder weapon” 
is in full swmg, but of what consequence are a few squibs 
apart from a bit of damage in England and pages full of it in 
the Boche newspapers? For that matter, when they really 
realize m “Bocheland” that the Bolshevists really are on the 
way, they’ll get even more jittery. 

All German women not in military service are being evacuated to Groningen, Friesland, and Gelderland with their children. MusserP has announced that if they get as far as here 
with the invasion he’ll put on a uniform. Does the old fatty 
want to do some fighting? He could have done so in Russia 
before now. Some time ago Finland turned down a peace 
offer, now the negotiations have just been broken off again, 
they’ll be sorry for it later, the silly fools! 

How far do you think we’ll be on July 27? 

Yours, Anne 
Friday , SO June , 1944 

Dear Kitty, 

Bad weather, or bad weather at a stretch to the thirtieth of 
June. 6 Isn’t that well said! Oh yes, I have a smattering of English already; just to show that I can, I’m reading An Ideal 
Husband with the aid of a dictionary. War going wonderfully! 
Bobroisk, Mogilef, and Orsa have fallen, lots of prisoners. 

x Mussert was the Dutch National Socialist leader. 

*In English in the original. 



' Everything's all right here and tempers are improving. The 
superoptimists are triumphing. Elli has changed her hair style, 
Miep has the week off. That’s the latest news. 

Yours, Anne 

Thursday , 6 July, 1944 

Dear Kitty, 

It strikes fear to my heart when Peter talks of later being a 
criminal, or of gambling; although it’s meant as a joke, of 
course, it gives me the feeling that he’s afraid of his own 
weakness. Again and again I hear from both Margot and 
Peter: “Yes, if I was as strong and plucky as you are, if I always stuck to what I wanted, if I had such persistent energy, 
yes then ... 1” 

I wonder if it’s really a good quality not to let myself be influenced. Is it really good to follow almost entirely my own 
conscience? 

Quite honestly, I can’t imagine how anyone can say: “I’m 
weak,” and then remain so. After all, if you know it, why not 
fight against it, why not try to train your character? The answer was: “Because it’s so much easier not to!” This reply 
rather discouraged me. Easy? Does that mean that a lazy, 
deceitful life is an easy life? Oh, no, that can’t be true, it 
mustn’t be true, people can so easily be tempted by slackness 
. . . and by money. 

I thought for a long time about the best answer to give 
Peter, how to get him to believe m himself and, above all, to 
try and improve himself; I don’t know whether my line of 
thought is right though, or not. 

I’ve so often thought how lovely it would be to have someone’s complete confidence, but now, now that I’m that far, I 
realize how difficult it is to think what the other person is 
thinking and then to find the right answer. More especially 
because the very ideas of “easy” and “money” are something 
entirely foreign and new to me. Peter’s beginning to lean on 
me a bit and that mustn’t happen under any circumstances. 



A type like Peter finds it difficult to stand on his own feet, but 
it's even harder to stand on your own feet as a conscious, living being. Because if you do, then if s twice as difficult to steer 
a right path through the sea of problems and still remain constant through it all. I’m just drifting around, have been searching for days, searching for a good argument against that terrible word “easy,” something to settle it once and for all. 

How can I make it clear to him that what appears easy and 
attractive will drag him down into the depths, depths where 
there is no comfort to be found, no friends and no beauty, 
depths from which it is almost impossible to raise oneself? 

We all live, but we don’t know the why or the wherefore. 
We all hve with the object of being happy; our lives are all 
different and yet the same. We three have been brought up in 
good circles, we have the chance to learn, the possibility of 
attaining something, we have all reason to hope for much happiness, but ... we must earn it for ourselves. And that is never 
easy. You must work and do good, not be lazy and gamble, if 
you wish to earn happiness. Laziness may appear attractive, 
but work gives satisfaction. 

I can’t understand people who don’t like work, yet that isn’t 
the case with Peter; he just hasn’t got a fixed goal to aim at, 
and he thinks he’s too stupid and too inferior to achieve anything. Poor boy, he’s never known what it feels like to make 
other people happy, and I can’t teach him that either. He has 
no religion, scoffs at Jesus Christ, and swears, using the name 
of God; although I’m not orthodox either, it hurts me every 
time I see how deserted, how scornful, and how poor he really 
is. 

People who have a religion should be glad, for not everyone 
has the gift of believing in heavenly things. You don’t necessarily even have to be afraid of punishment after death; 
purgatory, hell, and heaven are things that a lot of people 
can’t accept, but still a religion, it doesn’t matter which, keeps 
a person on the right path. It isn’t the fear of God but the upholding of one’s own honor and conscience. How noble and 
good everyone could be if, every evening before falling asleep, 
they were to recall to their minds the events of the whole day 



and consider exactly what has been good and bad. Then, without realizing it, you try to improve yourself at the start of each 
new day; of course, you achieve quite a lot in the course of 
time. Anyone can do this, it costs nothing and is certainly very 
helpful. Whoever doesn't know it must learn and find by experience that: "A quiet conscience makes one strong!” 

Yours, Anne 

Saturday , 8 July , 1944 

Dear Kitty, 

The chief representative of the business, Mr. B., has been 
in Beverwijk and managed, just like that, to get strawberries 
at the auction sale . 1 They arrived here dusty, covered with 
sand, but in large quantities. No less then twenty-four trays 
for the office people and us. That very same evening we bottled six jars and made eight pots of jam. The next morning 
Miep wanted to make jam for the office people. 

At half past twelve, no strangers in the house, front door 
bolted, trays fetched, Peter, Daddy, Van Daan clattering on 
the stairs: Anne, get hot water; Margot, bring a bucket; all 
hands on deck! I went into the kitchen, which was chock-full, 
with a queer feeling in my tummy, Miep, Elli, Koophuis, 
Henk, Daddy, Peter: the famihes in hiding and their supply 
column, all mingling together, and in the middle of the day 
too! 

People can't see in from outside because of the net curtains, 
but, even so, the loud voices and banging doors positively 
gave me the jitters. Are we really supposed to be m hiding? 
That's what flashed through my mind, and it gives me a very 
queer feeling to be able to appear in the world again. The 
pan was full, and I dashed upstairs again. The rest of the family was seated round our table in the kitchen busy stalk-picking-at least that's what they were supposed to be doing; more 
went into mouths than into buckets. Another bucket would 

*It is compulsory in Holland for all growers to sell their produce at public 
auction. 



soon be required. Peter went to the downstairs kitchen againthe bell rang twice; the bucket stayed where it was, Peter tore 
upstairs, locked the cupboard door! We were kicking our heels 
impatiently, couldn't turn on a tap, even though the strawberries were only half washed; the rule: "If anyone m the 
house, use no water, because of the noise," was strictly maintained. 

At one o'clock Henk came and told us that it was the postman. Peter hurried downstairs again. Ting-a-ling ... the bell, 
right about turn. I go and listen to see if I can hear anyone 
coming, first at our cupboard door and then creep to the top 
of the stairs. Finally Peter and I both lean over the banisters 
like a couple of thieves, listening to the din downstairs. No 
strange voices, Peter sneaks down, stops halfway, and calls 
out: "Elli!" No answer, one more: "Elli!” Peter's voice is 
drowned by the din in the kitchen. He goes right down and 
into the kitchen. I stand looking down tensely. "Get upstairs at 
once, Peter, the accountant is here, clear out!" It was Koophuis speaking. Peter comes upstairs sighing, the cupboard 
door closes. Finally Kraler arrives at half past one. “Oh, dearie 
me, I see nothing but strawberries, strawberries at breakfast, 
strawberries stewed by Miep, I smell strawberries, must have 
a rest from them and go upstairs— what is being washed up 
here . . . strawberries.” 

The remainder are being bottled. In the evening: two jars 
unsealed. Daddy quickly makes them into jam The next 
morning: two more unsealed and four in the afternoon. Van 
Daan hadn't brought them to the right temperature for sterilizing. Now Daddy makes jam every evening. 

We eat strawberries with our porridge, skimmed milk with 
strawberries, bread and butter with strawberries, strawberries 
for dessert, strawberries with sugar, strawberries with sand. 
For two whole days strawberries and nothing but strawberries, 
then the supply was finished or in bottles and under lock and 
key. 

"I say, Anne,” Margot calls out, "the greengrocer on the 
corner has let us have some green peas, nineteen pounds," 

THE DIARY OF A YOUNG GIRL 229 

“That's nice of him/' I replied. And it certainly is, but oh, the 
work . . . ugh! 

“You've all got to help shelling peas on Saturday morning,” 
Mummy announced when we were at table. And, sure enough, 
the big enamel pan duly appeared this morning, filled to the 
brim. Shelling peas is a boring job, but you ought to try 
“skinning" the pods. I don't think many people realize how 
soft and tasty the pod is when the skin on the inside has been 
removed. However, an even greater advantage is that the 
quantity which can be eaten is about triple the amount of 
when one only eats the peas. It's an exceptionally precise, 
finicky job, pulling out this skin; perhaps it's all right for 
pedantic dentists or precise office workers, but for an impatient teen-ager like me, it’s frightful. We began at half past 
mne, I got up at half past ten, at half past eleven I sat down 
again. This refrain hummed in my ears: bend the top, pull the 
skm, remove the string, throw out the pod, etc., etc., they 
dance before my eyes, green, green, green maggots, strings, 
rotten pods, green, green, green. Just for the sake of doing 
something, I chatter the whole morning, any nonsense that 
comes into my head, make everyone laugh, and bore them 
stiff. But every string that I pull makes me feel more certain 
that I never, never want to be just a housewife only! 

We finally have breakfast at twelve o'clock, but from half 
past twelve until quarter past one we've got to go skinning 
pods again. I’m just about seasick when I stop, the others a 
bit too. I go and sleep till four o’clock, but I'm still upset by 
those wretched peas. 

Yours, Anne 

Saturday , 15 July , 1944 

Dear Kitty, 

We have had a book from the library with the challenging 
title of: What Do You Think of the Modem Young Girl? I 
want to talk about this subject today. 

The author of this book criticizes “the youth of today” from 



top to toe, without, however, condemning the whole of the 
young brigade as "incapable of anything good/’ On the contrary, she is rather of the opinion that if young people wished, 
they have it in their hands to make a bigger, more beautiful 
and better world, but that they occupy themselves with superficial things, without giving a thought to real beauty. 

In some passages, the writer gave me very much the feeling 
she was directing her criticism at me, and that’s why I want 
to lay myself completely bare to you for once and defend myself against this attack. 

I have one outstanding trait in my character, which must 
strike anyone who knows me for any length of time, and that 
is my knowledge of myself. I can watch myself and my actions, just like an outsider. The Anne of every day I can face 
entirely without prejudice, without making excuses for her, 
and watch what’s good and what’s bad about her. This "selfconsciousness” haunts me, and every time I open my mouth I 
know as soon as I’ve spoken whether "that ought to have been 
different” or "that was right as it was.” There are so many 
things about myself that I condemn; I couldn’t begin to name 
them all. I understand more and more how true Daddy’s 
words were when he said: "All children must look after their 
own upbringing.” Parents can only give good advice or put 
them on the right paths, but the final forming of a person’s 
character lies in their own hands. 

In addition to this, I have lots of courage, I always feel so 
strong and as if I can bear a great deal, I feel so free and so 
young! I was glad when I first realized it, because I don’t think 
I shall easily bow down before the blows that inevitably come 
to everyone. 

But I’ve talked about these things so often before. Now I 
want to come to the chapter of "Daddy and Mummy don’t 
understand me.” Daddy and Mummy have always thoroughly 
spoiled me, were sweet to me, defended me, and have done all 
that parents could do. And yet I’ve felt so terribly lonely for a 
long time, so left out, neglected, and misunderstood. Daddy 
tried all he could to check my rebellious spirit, but it was no 

THE DIARY OF A YOUNG GIRL 231 

use, I have cured myself, by seeing for myself what was wrong 
in my behavior and keeping it before my eyes. 

How is it that Daddy was never any support to me in my 
struggle, why did he completely miss the mark when he 
wanted to offer me a helping hand? Daddy tried the wrong 
methods, he always talked to me as a child who was going 
through difficult phases. It sounds crazy, because Daddy’s the 
only one who has always taken me into his confidence, and 
no one but Daddy has given me the feeling that I’m sensible. 
But there’s one thing he’s omitted: you see, he hasn’t realized 
that for me the fight to get on top was more important than all 
else. I didn’t want to hear about “symptoms of your age,” or 
“other girls,” or “it wears off by itself”; I didn’t want to be 
treated as a girl-like-all-others, but as Anne-on-her-own-merits. 
Pirn didn’t understand that. For that matter, I can’t confide in 
anyone, unless they tell me a lot about themselves, and as I 
know very little about Pirn, I don’t feel that I can tread upon 
more intimate ground with him. Pirn always takes up the 
older, fatherly attitude, tells me that he too has had similar 
passing tendencies. But still he’s not able to feel with me like 
a friend, however hard he tries. These things have made me 
never mention my views on life nor my well-considered 
theories to anyone but my diary and, occasionally, to Margot. 
I concealed from Daddy everything that perturbed me; I 
never shared my ideals with him. I was aware of the fact that 
I was pushing him away from me. 

I couldn’t do anything else. I have acted entirely according 
to my feelings, but I have acted in the way that was best for 
my peace of mind. Because I should completely lose my repose and self-confidence, which I have built up so shakily, if, 
at this stage, I were to accept criticisms of my half-completed 
task. And I can’t do that even from Pim, although it sounds 
very hard, for not only have I not shared my secret thoughts 
with Pim but I have often pushed him even further from me, 
by my irritability. 

This is a point that I think a lot about: why is it that Pim 
annoys me? So much so that I can hardly bear him teaching 
me, that his affectionate ways strike me as being put on, that 



I want to be left in peace and would really prefer it if he 
dropped me a bit, until I felt more certain in my attitude towards him. Because I still have a gnawing feeling of guilt over 
that horrible letter that I dared to write him when I was so 
wound up. Oh, how hard it is to be really strong and brave in 
every way! 

Yet this was not my greatest disappointment; no, I ponder 
far more over Peter than Daddy. I know very well that I conquered him instead of he conquering me. I created an image 
of him in my mind, pictured him as a quiet, sensitive, lovable 
boy, who needed affection and friendship. I needed a living 
person to whom I could pour out my heart; I wanted a friend 
who’d help to put me on the right road. I achieved what I 
wanted, and slowly but surely, I drew him towards me. Finally, when I had made him feel friendly, it automatically developed into an intimacy which, on second thought, I don’t 
think I ought to have allowed. 

We talked about the most private things, and yet up till 
now we have never touched on those things that filled, and 
still fill, my heart and soul. I still don’t know quite what to 
make of Peter, is he superficial, or does he still feel shy, even 
of me? But dropping that, I committed one error m my desire 
to make a real friendship: I switched over and tried to get at 
him by developmg it into a more intimate relation, whereas I 
should have explored all other possibilities. He longs to be 
loved and I can see that he’s beginning to be more and more 
in love with me. He gets satisfaction out of our meetings, 
whereas they just have the effect of making me want to try it 
out with him again. And yet I don’t seem able to touch on the 
subjects that I’m so longing to bring out into the daylight. I 
drew Peter towards me, far more than he realizes. Now he 
clings to me, and for the time being, I don’t see any way of 
shaking him off and putting him on his own feet. When I 
realized that he could not be a friend for my understanding, I 
thought I would at least try to lift him up out of his narrowmindedness and make him do something with his youth. 

“For m its innermost depths youth is lonelier than old age.” 

I read this saying in some book and I’ve always remembered 
it, and found it to be true. Is it true then that grownups have 
a more difficult time here than we do? No. I know it isn’t. 
Older people have formed their opinions about everything, 
and don’t waver before they act. It’s twice as hard for us 
young ones to hold our ground, and maintain our opinions, in 
a time when all ideals are being shattered and destroyed, 
when people are showing their worst side, and do not know 
whether to believe in truth and right and God. 

Anyone who claims that the older ones have a more difficult 
time here certainly doesn’t realize to what extent our problems 
weigh down on us, problems for which we axe probably much 
too young, but which thrust themselves upon us continually, 
until, after a long time, we think weve found a solution, but 
the solution doesn’t seem able to resist the facts which reduce 
it to nothing again. That’s the difficulty in these times: ideals, 
dreams, and cherished hopes rise within us, only to meet the 
horrible truth and be shattered. 

It’s really a wonder that I haven’t dropped all my ideals, 
because they seem so absurd and impossible to carry out. Yet 
I keep them, because m spite of everything I still believe that 
people are really good at heart. I simply can’t build up my 
hopes on a foundation consisting of confusion, misery, and 
death. I see the world gradually being turned into a wilderness, I hear the ever approaching thunder, which will destroy 
us too, I can feel the sufferings of millions and yet, if I look up 
into the heavens, I think that it will all come right, that this 
cruelty too will end, and that peace and tranquillity will return again. 

In the meantime, I must uphold my ideals, for perhaps the 
time will come when I shall be able to carry them out. 

Yours, Anne 

Friday , 21 July , 1944 

Dear Kitty, 

Now I am getting really hopeful, now things are going well 



at last. Yes, really, they re going well! Super news! An attempt has been made on Hitler's life and not even by Jewish 
communists or English capitalists this time, but by a proud 
German general, and what's more, he's a count, and still quite 
young. The Fuhrer's life was saved by Divine Providence and, 
unfortunately, he managed to get off with just a few scratches 
and burns. A few officers and generals who were with him 
have been killed and wounded. The chief culprit was shot. 

Anyway, it certainly shows that there are lots of officers and 
generals who are sick of the war and would like to see Hitler 
descend into a bottomless pit. When they’ve disposed of Hitler, their aim is to establish a military dictator, who will make 
peace with the Allies, then they intend to rearm and start another wax in about twenty years' time. Perhaps the Divine 
Power tarried on purpose in getting him out of the way, because it would be much easier and more advantageous to the 
Allies if the impeccable Germans kill each other off; it'll make 
less work for the Russians and the English and they'll be able 
to begin rebuilding their own towns all the sooner. 

But still, were not that far yet, and I don't want to anticipate the glorious events too soon. Still, you must have noticed, 
this is all sober reality and that I'm in quite a matter-of-fact 
mood today; for once, I’m not jabbering about high ideals. 
And what's more, Hitler has even been so kind as to announce 
to his faithful, devoted people that from now on everyone in 
the armed forces must obey the Gestapo, and that any soldier 
who knows that one of his superiors was involved in this low, 
cowardly attempt upon his life may shoot the same on the 
spot, without court-martial. 

What a perfect shambles it's going to be. Little Johnnie's 
feet begin hurting him during a long march, he’s snapped at 
by his boss, the officer, Johnnie grabs his rifle and cries out: 
"You wanted to murder the Fiihrer, so there's your reward,” 
One bang and the proud chief who dared to tick off little 
Johnnie has passed into eternal life (or is it eternal death?). 
In the end, whenever an officer finds himself up against a 
soldier, or having to take the lead, he'll be wetting his pants 
from anxiety, because the soldiers will dare to say more than 

they do. Do you gather a bit what I mean, or have I been 
skipping too much from one subject to another? I can’t help 
it, the prospect that I may be sitting on school benches next 
October makes me feel far too cheerful to be logical! Oh, 
dearie me, hadn’t I just told you that I didn’t want to be too 
hopeful? Forgive me, they haven’t given me the name “little 
bundle of contradictions” all for nothing! 

Yours, Anne 

Tuesday , 1 August, 1944 

Dear Kitty, 

“Little bundle of contradictions.” That’s how I ended my 
last letter and that’s how I’m going to begin this one. “A little 
bundle of contradictions,” can you tell me exactly what it is? 
What does contradiction mean? Like so many words, it can 
mean two things, contradiction from without and contradiction from within. 

The first is the ordinary “not giving in easily, always knowing best, getting in the last word,” enfin, all the unpleasant 
qualities for which I’m renowned. The second nobody knows 
about, that’s my own secret. 

I’ve already told you before that I have, as it were, a dual 
personality One half embodies my exuberant cheerfulness, 
making fun of everything, my high-spiritedness, and above all, 
the way I take everything light. This includes not taking 
offense at a flirtation, a kiss, an embrace, a dirty joke. This 
side is usually lying in wait and pushes away the other which 
is much better, deeper and purer. You must realize that no 
one knows Anne’s better side and that’s why most people find 
me so insufferable. 

Certainly I’m a giddy clown for one afternoon, but then 
everyone’s had enough of me for another month. Really, it’s 
just the same as a love film is for deep-thinking people, simply 
a diversion, amusing just for once, something which is soon 
forgotten, not bad, but certainly not good. I loathe having to 
tell you this, but why shouldn’t I, if I know it’s true anyway? 


My lighter superficial side will always be too quick for the 
deeper side of me and that’s why it will always win. You can’t 
imagine how often I’ve already tried to push this Anne away, 
to cripple her, to hide her, because after all, she’s only half of 
what’s called Anne: but it doesn’t work and I know, too, why 
it doesn’t work. 

I’m awfully scared that everyone who knows me as I always 
am will discover that I have another side, a finer and better 
side. I’m afraid they’ll laugh at me, think I’m ridiculous and 
sentimental, not take me seriously. I’m used to not being taken 
seriously but it’s only the ‘lighthearted” Anne that’s used to it 
and can bear it; the “deeper” Anne is too frail for it. Sometimes, if I really compel the good Anne to take the stage for a 
quarter of an hour, she simply shrivels up as soon as she has to 
speak, and lets Anne number one take over, and before I realize it, she has disappeared. 

Therefore, the nice Anne is never present in company, has 
not appeared one single time so far, but almost always predominates when were alone. I know exactly how I’d like to 
be, how I am too . . . inside. But, alas, I’m only like that for 
myself. And perhaps that’s why, no, I’m sure it’s the reason 
why I say I’ve got a happy nature within and why other people think I’ve got a happy nature without. I am guided by the 
pure Anne within, but outside I’m nothing but a frolicsome 
little goat who’s broken loose. 

As I’ve already said, I never utter my real feelings about 
anything and that’s how I’ve acquired the name of chaserafter-boys, flirt, know-all, reader of love stories. The cheerful 
Anne laughs about it, gives cheeky answers, shrugs her shoulders indifferently, behaves as if she doesn’t care, but, oh 
dearie me, the quiet Anne’s reactions are just the opposite. If 
I’m to be quite honest, then I must admit that it does hurt me, 
that I try terribly hard to change myself, but that I’m always 
fighting against a more powerful enemy. 

A voice sobs within me: “There you are, that’s what’s become of you: you’re uncharitable, you look supercilious and 
peevish, people dislike you and all because you won’t listen to 
the advice given you by your own better hah.” Oh, I would 

like to listen, but it doesn’t work; if I’m quiet and serious, 
everyone thinks it’s a new comedy and then I have to get out 
of it by turning it mto a joke, not to mention my own family, 
who are sure to think I’m ill, make me swallow pills for headaches and nerves, feel my neck and my head to see whether 
I’m running a temperature, ask if I’m constipated and criticize 
me for being in a bad mood. I can’t keep that up: if I’m 
watched to that extent, I start by getting snappy, then unhappy, and finally I twist my heart round again, so that the 
bad is on the outside and the good is on the inside and keep 
on trying to find a way of becoming what I would so like to 
be, and what I could be, if . . . there weren’t any other people 
living in the world. 

Yours, Anne 

EPILOGUE 

Anne's diary ends here. On August 4, 1944 , the Griine 
Polizei made a raid on the tc Secret Annexe” All the occupants , 
together with Kraler and Koophuis, were arrested and sent to 
German and Dutch concentration camps. 

The “Secret Annexe” was plundered by the Gestapo. 
Among a pile of old books, magazines, and newspapers which 
were left lying on the floor, Miep and Elli found Anne's diary . 
Apart from a eery few passages , which are of little interest to 
the reader, the original text has been printed. 

Of all the occupants of the “Secret Annexe,” Anne's father 
done returned. Kraler and Koophuis, who withstood the hardships of the Dutch camp, were able to go home to their families. 

In March 1945, two months before the liberation of Holland, Anne died in the concentration camp at Bergen-Belsen. 
