Chapter XII
“Averil’s Atonement”

“What are you dreaming of, Anne?”

The two girls were loitering one evening in a fairy hollow of the
brook. Ferns nodded in it, and little grasses were green, and wild
pears hung finely-scented, white curtains around it.

Anne roused herself from her reverie with a happy sigh.

“I was thinking out my story, Diana.”

“Oh, have you really begun it?” cried Diana, all alight with eager
interest in a moment.

“Yes, I have only a few pages written, but I have it all pretty well
thought out. I’ve had such a time to get a suitable plot. None of the
plots that suggested themselves suited a girl named _Averil_.”

“Couldn’t you have changed her name?”

“No, the thing was impossible. I tried to, but I couldn’t do it, any
more than I could change yours. _Averil_ was so real to me that no
matter what other name I tried to give her I just thought of her as
_Averil_ behind it all. But finally I got a plot that matched her. Then
came the excitement of choosing names for all my characters. You have
no idea how fascinating that is. I’ve lain awake for hours thinking
over those names. The hero’s name is _Perceval Dalrymple_.”

“Have you named _all_ the characters?” asked Diana wistfully. “If you
hadn’t I was going to ask you to let me name one—just some unimportant
person. I’d feel as if I had a share in the story then.”

“You may name the little hired boy who lived with the _Lesters_,”
conceded Anne. “He is not very important, but he is the only one left
unnamed.”

“Call him _Raymond Fitzosborne_,” suggested Diana, who had a store of
such names laid away in her memory, relics of the old “Story Club,”
which she and Anne and Jane Andrews and Ruby Gillis had had in their
schooldays.

Anne shook her head doubtfully.

“I’m afraid that is too aristocratic a name for a chore boy, Diana. I
couldn’t imagine a Fitzosborne feeding pigs and picking up chips, could
you?”

Diana didn’t see why, if you had an imagination at all, you couldn’t
stretch it to that extent; but probably Anne knew best, and the chore
boy was finally christened _Robert Ray_, to be called _Bobby_ should
occasion require.

“How much do you suppose you’ll get for it?” asked Diana.

But Anne had not thought about this at all. She was in pursuit of fame,
not filthy lucre, and her literary dreams were as yet untainted by
mercenary considerations.

“You’ll let me read it, won’t you?” pleaded Diana.

“When it is finished I’ll read it to you and Mr. Harrison, and I shall
want you to criticize it _severely_. No one else shall see it until it
is published.”

“How are you going to end it—happily or unhappily?”

“I’m not sure. I’d like it to end unhappily, because that would be so
much more romantic. But I understand editors have a prejudice against
sad endings. I heard Professor Hamilton say once that nobody but a
genius should try to write an unhappy ending. And,” concluded Anne
modestly, “I’m anything but a genius.”

“Oh I like happy endings best. You’d better let him marry her,” said
Diana, who, especially since her engagement to Fred, thought this was
how every story should end.

“But you like to cry over stories?”

“Oh, yes, in the middle of them. But I like everything to come right at
last.”

“I must have one pathetic scene in it,” said Anne thoughtfully. “I
might let _Robert Ray_ be injured in an accident and have a death
scene.”

“No, you mustn’t kill _Bobby_ off,” declared Diana, laughing. “He
belongs to me and I want him to live and flourish. Kill somebody else
if you have to.”

For the next fortnight Anne writhed or reveled, according to mood, in
her literary pursuits. Now she would be jubilant over a brilliant idea,
now despairing because some contrary character would _not_ behave
properly. Diana could not understand this.

“_Make_ them do as you want them to,” she said.

“I can’t,” mourned Anne. “Averil is such an unmanageable heroine. She
_will_ do and say things I never meant her to. Then that spoils
everything that went before and I have to write it all over again.”

Finally, however, the story was finished, and Anne read it to Diana in
the seclusion of the porch gable. She had achieved her “pathetic scene”
without sacrificing _Robert Ray_, and she kept a watchful eye on Diana
as she read it. Diana rose to the occasion and cried properly; but,
when the end came, she looked a little disappointed.

“Why did you kill _Maurice Lennox?_” she asked reproachfully.

“He was the villain,” protested Anne. “He had to be punished.”

“I like him best of them all,” said unreasonable Diana.

“Well, he’s dead, and he’ll have to stay dead,” said Anne, rather
resentfully. “If I had let him live he’d have gone on persecuting
_Averil_ and _Perceval_.”

“Yes—unless you had reformed him.”

“That wouldn’t have been romantic, and, besides, it would have made the
story too long.”

“Well, anyway, it’s a perfectly elegant story, Anne, and will make you
famous, of that I’m sure. Have you got a title for it?”

“Oh, I decided on the title long ago. I call it _Averil’s atonement_.
Doesn’t that sound nice and alliterative? Now, Diana, tell me candidly,
do you see any faults in my story?”

“Well,” hesitated Diana, “that part where _Averil_ makes the cake
doesn’t seem to me quite romantic enough to match the rest. It’s just
what anybody might do. Heroines shouldn’t do cooking, _I_ think.”

“Why, that is where the humor comes in, and it’s one of the best parts
of the whole story,” said Anne. And it may be stated that in this she
was quite right.

Diana prudently refrained from any further criticism, but Mr. Harrison
was much harder to please. First he told her there was entirely too
much description in the story.

“Cut out all those flowery passages,” he said unfeelingly.

Anne had an uncomfortable conviction that Mr. Harrison was right, and
she forced herself to expunge most of her beloved descriptions, though
it took three re-writings before the story could be pruned down to
please the fastidious Mr. Harrison.

“I’ve left out _all_ the descriptions but the sunset,” she said at
last. “I simply _couldn’t_ let it go. It was the best of them all.”

“It hasn’t anything to do with the story,” said Mr. Harrison, “and you
shouldn’t have laid the scene among rich city people. What do you know
of them? Why didn’t you lay it right here in Avonlea—changing the name,
of course, or else Mrs. Rachel Lynde would probably think she was the
heroine.”

“Oh, that would never have done,” protested Anne. “Avonlea is the
dearest place in the world, but it isn’t quite romantic enough for the
scene of a story.”

“I daresay there’s been many a romance in Avonlea—and many a tragedy,
too,” said Mr. Harrison drily. “But your folks ain’t like real folks
anywhere. They talk too much and use too high-flown language. There’s
one place where that _Dalrymple_ chap talks even on for two pages, and
never lets the girl get a word in edgewise. If he’d done that in real
life she’d have pitched him.”

“I don’t believe it,” said Anne flatly. In her secret soul she thought
that the beautiful, poetical things said to _Averil_ would win any
girl’s heart completely. Besides, it was gruesome to hear of _Averil_,
the stately, queen-like _Averil_, “pitching” any one. _Averil_
“declined her suitors.”

“Anyhow,” resumed the merciless Mr. Harrison, “I don’t see why _Maurice
Lennox_ didn’t get her. He was twice the man the other is. He did bad
things, but he did them. Perceval hadn’t time for anything but
mooning.”

“Mooning.” That was even worse than “pitching!”

“_Maurice Lennox_ was the villain,” said Anne indignantly. “I don’t see
why every one likes him better than _Perceval_.”

“Perceval is too good. He’s aggravating. Next time you write about a
hero put a little spice of human nature in him.”

“_Averil_ couldn’t have married _Maurice_. He was bad.”

“She’d have reformed him. You can reform a man; you can’t reform a
jelly-fish, of course. Your story isn’t bad—it’s kind of interesting,
I’ll admit. But you’re too young to write a story that would be worth
while. Wait ten years.”

Anne made up her mind that the next time she wrote a story she wouldn’t
ask anybody to criticize it. It was too discouraging. She would not
read the story to Gilbert, although she told him about it.

“If it is a success you’ll see it when it is published, Gilbert, but if
it is a failure nobody shall ever see it.”

Marilla knew nothing about the venture. In imagination Anne saw herself
reading a story out of a magazine to Marilla, entrapping her into
praise of it—for in imagination all things are possible—and then
triumphantly announcing herself the author.

One day Anne took to the Post Office a long, bulky envelope, addressed,
with the delightful confidence of youth and inexperience, to the very
biggest of the “big” magazines. Diana was as excited over it as Anne
herself.

“How long do you suppose it will be before you hear from it?” she
asked.

“It shouldn’t be longer than a fortnight. Oh, how happy and proud I
shall be if it is accepted!”

“Of course it will be accepted, and they will likely ask you to send
them more. You may be as famous as Mrs. Morgan some day, Anne, and then
how proud I’ll be of knowing you,” said Diana, who possessed, at least,
the striking merit of an unselfish admiration of the gifts and graces
of her friends.

A week of delightful dreaming followed, and then came a bitter
awakening. One evening Diana found Anne in the porch gable, with
suspicious-looking eyes. On the table lay a long envelope and a
crumpled manuscript.

“Anne, your story hasn’t come back?” cried Diana incredulously.

“Yes, it has,” said Anne shortly.

“Well, that editor must be crazy. What reason did he give?”

“No reason at all. There is just a printed slip saying that it wasn’t
found acceptable.”

“I never thought much of that magazine, anyway,” said Diana hotly. “The
stories in it are not half as interesting as those in the _Canadian
Woman_, although it costs so much more. I suppose the editor is
prejudiced against any one who isn’t a Yankee. Don’t be discouraged,
Anne. Remember how Mrs. Morgan’s stories came back. Send yours to the
_Canadian Woman_.”

“I believe I will,” said Anne, plucking up heart. “And if it is
published I’ll send that American editor a marked copy. But I’ll cut
the sunset out. I believe Mr. Harrison was right.”

Out came the sunset; but in spite of this heroic mutilation the editor
of the _Canadian Woman_ sent Averil’s Atonement back so promptly that
the indignant Diana declared that it couldn’t have been read at all,
and vowed she was going to stop her subscription immediately. Anne took
this second rejection with the calmness of despair. She locked the
story away in the garret trunk where the old Story Club tales reposed;
but first she yielded to Diana’s entreaties and gave her a copy.

“This is the end of my literary ambitions,” she said bitterly.

She never mentioned the matter to Mr. Harrison, but one evening he
asked her bluntly if her story had been accepted.

“No, the editor wouldn’t take it,” she answered briefly.

Mr. Harrison looked sidewise at the flushed, delicate profile.

“Well, I suppose you’ll keep on writing them,” he said encouragingly.

“No, I shall never try to write a story again,” declared Anne, with the
hopeless finality of nineteen when a door is shut in its face.

“I wouldn’t give up altogether,” said Mr. Harrison reflectively. “I’d
write a story once in a while, but I wouldn’t pester editors with it.
I’d write of people and places like I knew, and I’d make my characters
talk everyday English; and I’d let the sun rise and set in the usual
quiet way without much fuss over the fact. If I had to have villains at
all, I’d give them a chance, Anne—I’d give them a chance. There are
some terrible bad men in the world, I suppose, but you’d have to go a
long piece to find them—though Mrs. Lynde believes we’re all bad. But
most of us have got a little decency somewhere in us. Keep on writing,
Anne.”

“No. It was very foolish of me to attempt it. When I’m through Redmond
I’ll stick to teaching. I can teach. I can’t write stories.”

“It’ll be time for you to be getting a husband when you’re through
Redmond,” said Mr. Harrison. “I don’t believe in putting marrying off
too long—like I did.”

Anne got up and marched home. There were times when Mr. Harrison was
really intolerable. “Pitching,” “mooning,” and “getting a husband.”
Ow!!