XVII

A Chapter of Accidents


Anne woke three times in the night and made pilgrimages to her window
to make sure that Uncle Abe’s prediction was not coming true. Finally
the morning dawned pearly and lustrous in a sky full of silver sheen
and radiance, and the wonderful day had arrived.

Diana appeared soon after breakfast, with a basket of flowers over one
arm and _her_ muslin dress over the other . . . for it would not do to
don it until all the dinner preparations were completed. Meanwhile she
wore her afternoon pink print and a lawn apron fearfully and
wonderfully ruffled and frilled; and very neat and pretty and rosy she
was.

“You look simply sweet,” said Anne admiringly.

Diana sighed.

“But I’ve had to let out every one of my dresses _again_. I weigh four
pounds more than I did in July. Anne, _where_ will this end? Mrs.
Morgan’s heroines are all tall and slender.”

“Well, let’s forget our troubles and think of our mercies,” said Anne
gaily. “Mrs. Allan says that whenever we think of anything that is a
trial to us we should also think of something nice that we can set over
against it. If you are slightly too plump you’ve got the dearest
dimples; and if I have a freckled nose the _shape_ of it is all right.
Do you think the lemon juice did any good?”

“Yes, I really think it did,” said Diana critically; and, much elated,
Anne led the way to the garden, which was full of airy shadows and
wavering golden lights.

“We’ll decorate the parlor first. We have plenty of time, for Priscilla
said they’d be here about twelve or half past at the latest, so we’ll
have dinner at one.”

There may have been two happier and more excited girls somewhere in
Canada or the United States at that moment, but I doubt it. Every snip
of the scissors, as rose and peony and bluebell fell, seemed to chirp,
“Mrs. Morgan is coming today.” Anne wondered how Mr. Harrison _could_
go on placidly mowing hay in the field across the lane, just as if
nothing were going to happen.

The parlor at Green Gables was a rather severe and gloomy apartment,
with rigid horsehair furniture, stiff lace curtains, and white
antimacassars that were always laid at a perfectly correct angle,
except at such times as they clung to unfortunate people’s buttons.
Even Anne had never been able to infuse much grace into it, for Marilla
would not permit any alterations. But it is wonderful what flowers can
accomplish if you give them a fair chance; when Anne and Diana finished
with the room you would not have recognized it.

A great blue bowlful of snowballs overflowed on the polished table. The
shining black mantelpiece was heaped with roses and ferns. Every shelf
of the what-not held a sheaf of bluebells; the dark corners on either
side of the grate were lighted up with jars full of glowing crimson
peonies, and the grate itself was aflame with yellow poppies. All this
splendor and color, mingled with the sunshine falling through the
honeysuckle vines at the windows in a leafy riot of dancing shadows
over walls and floor, made of the usually dismal little room the
veritable “bower” of Anne’s imagination, and even extorted a tribute of
admiration from Marilla, who came in to criticize and remained to
praise.

“Now, we must set the table,” said Anne, in the tone of a priestess
about to perform some sacred rite in honor of a divinity. “We’ll have a
big vaseful of wild roses in the center and one single rose in front of
everybody’s plate—and a special bouquet of rosebuds only by Mrs.
Morgan’s—an allusion to ‘The Rosebud Garden’ you know.”

The table was set in the sitting room, with Marilla’s finest linen and
the best china, glass, and silver. You may be perfectly certain that
every article placed on it was polished or scoured to the highest
possible perfection of gloss and glitter.

Then the girls tripped out to the kitchen, which was filled with
appetizing odors emanating from the oven, where the chickens were
already sizzling splendidly. Anne prepared the potatoes and Diana got
the peas and beans ready. Then, while Diana shut herself into the
pantry to compound the lettuce salad, Anne, whose cheeks were already
beginning to glow crimson, as much with excitement as from the heat of
the fire, prepared the bread sauce for the chickens, minced her onions
for the soup, and finally whipped the cream for her lemon pies.

And what about Davy all this time? Was he redeeming his promise to be
good? He was, indeed. To be sure, he insisted on remaining in the
kitchen, for his curiosity wanted to see all that went on. But as he
sat quietly in a corner, busily engaged in untying the knots in a piece
of herring net he had brought home from his last trip to the shore,
nobody objected to this.

At half past eleven the lettuce salad was made, the golden circles of
the pies were heaped with whipped cream, and everything was sizzling
and bubbling that ought to sizzle and bubble.

“We’d better go and dress now,” said Anne, “for they may be here by
twelve. We must have dinner at sharp one, for the soup must be served
as soon as it’s done.”

Serious indeed were the toilet rites presently performed in the east
gable. Anne peered anxiously at her nose and rejoiced to see that its
freckles were not at all prominent, thanks either to the lemon juice or
to the unusual flush on her cheeks. When they were ready they looked
quite as sweet and trim and girlish as ever did any of “Mrs. Morgan’s
heroines.”

“I do hope I’ll be able to say something once in a while, and not sit
like a mute,” said Diana anxiously. “All Mrs. Morgan’s heroines
converse so beautifully. But I’m afraid I’ll be tongue-tied and stupid.
And I’ll be sure to say ‘I seen.’ I haven’t often said it since Miss
Stacy taught here; but in moments of excitement it’s sure to pop out.
Anne, if I were to say ‘I seen’ before Mrs. Morgan I’d die of
mortification. And it would be almost as bad to have nothing to say.”

“I’m nervous about a good many things,” said Anne, “but I don’t think
there is much fear that I won’t be able to _talk_.”

And, to do her justice, there wasn’t.

Anne shrouded her muslin glories in a big apron and went down to
concoct her soup. Marilla had dressed herself and the twins, and looked
more excited than she had ever been known to look before. At half past
twelve the Allans and Miss Stacy came. Everything was going well but
Anne was beginning to feel nervous. It was surely time for Priscilla
and Mrs. Morgan to arrive. She made frequent trips to the gate and
looked as anxiously down the lane as ever her namesake in the Bluebeard
story peered from the tower casement.

“Suppose they don’t come at all?” she said piteously.

“Don’t suppose it. It would be too mean,” said Diana, who, however, was
beginning to have uncomfortable misgivings on the subject.

“Anne,” said Marilla, coming out from the parlor, “Miss Stacy wants to
see Miss Barry’s willowware platter.”

Anne hastened to the sitting room closet to get the platter. She had,
in accordance with her promise to Mrs. Lynde, written to Miss Barry of
Charlottetown, asking for the loan of it. Miss Barry was an old friend
of Anne’s, and she promptly sent the platter out, with a letter
exhorting Anne to be very careful of it, for she had paid twenty
dollars for it. The platter had served its purpose at the Aid bazaar
and had then been returned to the Green Gables closet, for Anne would
not trust anybody but herself to take it back to town.

She carried the platter carefully to the front door where her guests
were enjoying the cool breeze that blew up from the brook. It was
examined and admired; then, just as Anne had taken it back into her own
hands, a terrific crash and clatter sounded from the kitchen pantry.
Marilla, Diana, and Anne fled out, the latter pausing only long enough
to set the precious platter hastily down on the second step of the
stairs.

When they reached the pantry a truly harrowing spectacle met their eyes
. . . a guilty looking small boy scrambling down from the table, with
his clean print blouse liberally plastered with yellow filling, and on
the table the shattered remnants of what had been two brave, becreamed
lemon pies.

Davy had finished ravelling out his herring net and had wound the twine
into a ball. Then he had gone into the pantry to put it up on the shelf
above the table, where he already kept a score or so of similar balls,
which, so far as could be discovered, served no useful purpose save to
yield the joy of possession. Davy had to climb on the table and reach
over to the shelf at a dangerous angle . . . something he had been
forbidden by Marilla to do, as he had come to grief once before in the
experiment. The result in this instance was disastrous. Davy slipped
and came sprawling squarely down on the lemon pies. His clean blouse
was ruined for that time and the pies for all time. It is, however, an
ill wind that blows nobody good, and the pig was eventually the gainer
by Davy’s mischance.

“Davy Keith,” said Marilla, shaking him by the shoulder, “didn’t I
forbid you to climb up on that table again? Didn’t I?”

“I forgot,” whimpered Davy. “You’ve told me not to do such an awful lot
of things that I can’t remember them all.”

“Well, you march upstairs and stay there till after dinner. Perhaps
you’ll get them sorted out in your memory by that time. No, Anne, never
you mind interceding for him. I’m not punishing him because he spoiled
your pies . . . that was an accident. I’m punishing him for his
disobedience. Go, Davy, I say.”

“Ain’t I to have any dinner?” wailed Davy.

“You can come down after dinner is over and have yours in the kitchen.”

“Oh, all right,” said Davy, somewhat comforted. “I know Anne’ll save
some nice bones for me, won’t you, Anne? ’Cause you know I didn’t mean
to fall on the pies. Say, Anne, since they _are_ spoiled can’t I take
some of the pieces upstairs with me?”

“No, no lemon pie for you, Master Davy,” said Marilla, pushing him
toward the hall.

“What shall we do for dessert?” asked Anne, looking regretfully at the
wreck and ruin.

“Get out a crock of strawberry preserves,” said Marilla consolingly.
“There’s plenty of whipped cream left in the bowl for it.”

One o’clock came . . . but no Priscilla or Mrs. Morgan. Anne was in an
agony. Everything was done to a turn and the soup was just what soup
should be, but couldn’t be depended on to remain so for any length of
time.

“I don’t believe they’re coming after all,” said Marilla crossly.

Anne and Diana sought comfort in each other’s eyes.

At half past one Marilla again emerged from the parlor.

“Girls, we _must_ have dinner. Everybody is hungry and it’s no use
waiting any longer. Priscilla and Mrs. Morgan are not coming, that’s
plain, and nothing is being improved by waiting.”

Anne and Diana set about lifting the dinner, with all the zest gone out
of the performance.

“I don’t believe I’ll be able to eat a mouthful,” said Diana dolefully.

“Nor I. But I hope everything will be nice for Miss Stacy’s and Mr. and
Mrs. Allan’s sakes,” said Anne listlessly.

When Diana dished the peas she tasted them and a very peculiar
expression crossed her face.

“Anne, did _you_ put sugar in these peas?”

“Yes,” said Anne, mashing the potatoes with the air of one expected to
do her duty. “I put a spoonful of sugar in. We always do. Don’t you
like it?”

“But _I_ put a spoonful in too, when I set them on the stove,” said
Diana.

Anne dropped her masher and tasted the peas also. Then she made a
grimace.

“How awful! I never dreamed you had put sugar in, because I knew your
mother never does. I happened to think of it, for a wonder . . . I’m
always forgetting it . . . so I popped a spoonful in.”

“It’s a case of too many cooks, I guess,” said Marilla, who had
listened to this dialogue with a rather guilty expression. “I didn’t
think you’d remember about the sugar, Anne, for I’m perfectly certain
you never did before . . . so _I_ put in a spoonful.”

The guests in the parlor heard peal after peal of laughter from the
kitchen, but they never knew what the fun was about. There were no
green peas on the dinner table that day, however.

“Well,” said Anne, sobering down again with a sigh of recollection, “we
have the salad anyhow and I don’t think anything has happened to the
beans. Let’s carry the things in and get it over.”

It cannot be said that that dinner was a notable success socially. The
Allans and Miss Stacy exerted themselves to save the situation and
Marilla’s customary placidity was not noticeably ruffled. But Anne and
Diana, between their disappointment and the reaction from their
excitement of the forenoon, could neither talk nor eat. Anne tried
heroically to bear her part in the conversation for the sake of her
guests; but all the sparkle had been quenched in her for the time
being, and, in spite of her love for the Allans and Miss Stacy, she
couldn’t help thinking how nice it would be when everybody had gone
home and she could bury her weariness and disappointment in the pillows
of the east gable.

There is an old proverb that really seems at times to be inspired . . .
“it never rains but it pours.” The measure of that day’s tribulations
was not yet full. Just as Mr. Allan had finished returning thanks there
arose a strange, ominous sound on the stairs, as of some hard, heavy
object bounding from step to step, finishing up with a grand smash at
the bottom. Everybody ran out into the hall. Anne gave a shriek of
dismay.

At the bottom of the stairs lay a big pink conch shell amid the
fragments of what had been Miss Barry’s platter; and at the top of the
stairs knelt a terrified Davy, gazing down with wide-open eyes at the
havoc.

“Davy,” said Marilla ominously, “did you throw that conch down _on
purpose?_”

“No, I never did,” whimpered Davy. “I was just kneeling here, quiet as
quiet, to watch you folks through the bannisters, and my foot struck
that old thing and pushed it off . . . and I’m awful hungry . . . and I
do wish you’d lick a fellow and have done with it, instead of always
sending him upstairs to miss all the fun.”

“Don’t blame Davy,” said Anne, gathering up the fragments with
trembling fingers. “It was my fault. I set that platter there and
forgot all about it. I am properly punished for my carelessness; but
oh, what will Miss Barry say?”

“Well, you know she only bought it, so it isn’t the same as if it was
an heirloom,” said Diana, trying to console.

The guests went away soon after, feeling that it was the most tactful
thing to do, and Anne and Diana washed the dishes, talking less than
they had ever been known to do before. Then Diana went home with a
headache and Anne went with another to the east gable, where she stayed
until Marilla came home from the post office at sunset, with a letter
from Priscilla, written the day before. Mrs. Morgan had sprained her
ankle so severely that she could not leave her room.

“And oh, Anne dear,” wrote Priscilla, “I’m so sorry, but I’m afraid we
won’t get up to Green Gables at all now, for by the time Aunty’s ankle
is well she will have to go back to Toronto. She has to be there by a
certain date.”

“Well,” sighed Anne, laying the letter down on the red sandstone step
of the back porch, where she was sitting, while the twilight rained
down out of a dappled sky, “I always thought it was too good to be true
that Mrs. Morgan should really come. But there . . . that speech sounds
as pessimistic as Miss Eliza Andrews and I’m ashamed of making it.
After all, it was _not_ too good to be true . . . things just as good
and far better are coming true for me all the time. And I suppose the
events of today have a funny side too. Perhaps when Diana and I are old
and gray we shall be able to laugh over them. But I feel that I can’t
expect to do it before then, for it has truly been a bitter
disappointment.”

“You’ll probably have a good many more and worse disappointments than
that before you get through life,” said Marilla, who honestly thought
she was making a comforting speech. “It seems to me, Anne, that you are
never going to outgrow your fashion of setting your heart so on things
and then crashing down into despair because you don’t get them.”

“I know I’m too much inclined that, way” agreed Anne ruefully. “When I
think something nice is going to happen I seem to fly right up on the
wings of anticipation; and then the first thing I realize I drop down
to earth with a thud. But really, Marilla, the flying part _is_
glorious as long as it lasts . . . it’s like soaring through a sunset.
I think it almost pays for the thud.”

“Well, maybe it does,” admitted Marilla. “I’d rather walk calmly along
and do without both flying and thud. But everybody has her own way of
living . . . I used to think there was only one right way . . . but
since I’ve had you and the twins to bring up I don’t feel so sure of
it. What are you going to do about Miss Barry’s platter?”

“Pay her back the twenty dollars she paid for it, I suppose. I’m so
thankful it wasn’t a cherished heirloom because then no money could
replace it.”

“Maybe you could find one like it somewhere and buy it for her.”

“I’m afraid not. Platters as old as that are very scarce. Mrs. Lynde
couldn’t find one anywhere for the supper. I only wish I could, for of
course Miss Barry would just as soon have one platter as another, if
both were equally old and genuine. Marilla, look at that big star over
Mr. Harrison’s maple grove, with all that holy hush of silvery sky
about it. It gives me a feeling that is like a prayer. After all, when
one can see stars and skies like that, little disappointments and
accidents can’t matter so much, can they?”

“Where’s Davy?” said Marilla, with an indifferent glance at the star.

“In bed. I’ve promised to take him and Dora to the shore for a picnic
tomorrow. Of course, the original agreement was that he must be good.
But he _tried_ to be good . . . and I hadn’t the heart to disappoint
him.”

“You’ll drown yourself or the twins, rowing about the pond in that
flat,” grumbled Marilla. “I’ve lived here for sixty years and I’ve
never been on the pond yet.”

“Well, it’s never too late to mend,” said Anne roguishly. “Suppose you
come with us tomorrow. We’ll shut Green Gables up and spend the whole
day at the shore, daffing the world aside.”

“No, thank you,” said Marilla, with indignant emphasis. “I’d be a nice
sight, wouldn’t I, rowing down the pond in a flat? I think I hear
Rachel pronouncing on it. There’s Mr. Harrison driving away somewhere.
Do you suppose there is any truth in the gossip that Mr. Harrison is
going to see Isabella Andrews?”

“No, I’m sure there isn’t. He just called there one evening on business
with Mr. Harmon Andrews and Mrs. Lynde saw him and said she knew he was
courting because he had a white collar on. I don’t believe Mr. Harrison
will ever marry. He seems to have a prejudice against marriage.”

“Well, you can never tell about those old bachelors. And if he had a
white collar on I’d agree with Rachel that it looks suspicious, for I’m
sure he never was seen with one before.”

“I think he only put it on because he wanted to conclude a business
deal with Harmon Andrews,” said Anne. “I’ve heard him say that’s the
only time a man needs to be particular about his appearance, because if
he looks prosperous the party of the second part won’t be so likely to
try to cheat him. I really feel sorry for Mr. Harrison; I don’t believe
he feels satisfied with his life. It must be very lonely to have no one
to care about except a parrot, don’t you think? But I notice Mr.
Harrison doesn’t like to be pitied. Nobody does, I imagine.”

“There’s Gilbert coming up the lane,” said Marilla. “If he wants you to
go for a row on the pond mind you put on your coat and rubbers. There’s
a heavy dew tonight.”