Friday , 26 May, 1944

Dear Kitty, 

At last, at last I can sit quietly at my table in front of a 
crack of window and write you everything. 

I feel so miserable, I haven’t felt like this for months; even 
after the burglary I didn’t feel so utterly broken. On the 
one hand, the vegetable man, the Jewish question, which 
is being discussed minutely over the whole house, the invasion delay, the bad food, the strain, the miserable atmosphere, my disappointment in Peter; and on the other hand, 
Elli’s engagement, Whitsun reception, flowers, Kraler’s 
birthday, fancy cakes, and stories about cabarets, films, and 
concerts. That difference, that huge difference, it’s always 
there; one day we laugh and see the funny side of the situation, but the next we are afraid, fear, suspense, and despair 
staring from our faces. Miep and Kraler carry the heaviest 
[burden of the eight in hiding, Miep in all she does, and 
Kraler through the enormous responsibility, which is sometimes so much for him that he can hardly talk from pent-up 
nerves and strain. Koophuis and Elli look after us well too, 
but they can forget us at times, even if it’s only for a few 
hours, or a day, or even two days. They have their own worries, Koophuis over his health, Elli over her engagement, 



which is not altogether rosy, but they also have their little outings, visits to friends, and the whole life of ordinary people. 
For them the suspense is sometimes lifted, even if it is only for 
a short time, but for us it never lifts for a moment. We’ve been 
here for two years now; how long have we still to put up with 
this almost unbearable, ever increasing pressure? 

The sewer is blocked, so we mustn’t run water, or rather 
only a trickle; when we go to the W.C. we have to take a lavatory brush with us, and we keep dirty water in a large Cologne 
pot. We can manage for today, but what do we do if the 
plumber can’t do the job alone? The municipal scavenging 
service doesn’t come until Tuesday, 

Miep sent us a currant cake, made up in the shape of a doll, 
with the words “Happy Whitsun” on the note attached to it. 
It’s almost as if she’s ridiculing us; our present frame of mind 
and our uneasiness could hardly be called “happy.” The affair 
of the vegetable man has made us more nervous, you hear 
“shh, shh” from all sides again, and we re being quieter over 
everything. The police forced the door there, so they could do 
it to us tool If one day we too should ... no, I mustn’t write 
it, but I can’t put the question out of my mind today. On the 
contrary, all the fear I’ve already been through seems to face 
me again in all its frightfulness. 

This evening at eight o’clock I had to go to the downstairs 
lavatory all alone; there was no one down there, as everyone 
was listening to the radio; I wanted to be brave, but it was 
difficult. I always feel much safer here upstairs than alone 
downstairs in that large, silent house; alone with the mysterious muffled noises from upstairs and the tooting of motor 
horns in the street. I have to hurry for I start to quiver if I begin thinking about the situation. 

Again and again I ask myself, would it not have been better 
for us all if we had not gone into hiding, and if we were dead 
now and not going through all this misery, especially as we 
shouldn’t be running our protectors into danger any more. But 
we all recoil from these thoughts too, for we still love life; we 
haven’t yet forgotten the voice of nature, we still hope, hope 
about everything. I hope something will happen soon now, 

shooting if need be^nothing can crush us more than this restlessness. Let the end come, even if it is hard; then at least we 
shall know whether we axe finally going to win through or go 
under. 

Yours, Anne 

Wednesday, SI May, 1944 

Dear Kitty, 

It was so frightfully hot on Saturday, Sunday, Monday, and 
Tuesday that I simply couldn’t hold a fountain pen in my 
hand. That’s why it was impossible to write to you. The drains 
went phut again on Friday, were mended again on Saturday; 
Mr. Koophuis came to see us in the afternoon and told us 
masses about Corry and her being in the same hockey club as 
Jopie. 

On Sunday Elli came to make sure no one had broken in 
and stayed for breakfast, on Whit Monday Mr. Van Santen 
acted as the hide-out watchman, and, finally, on Tuesday the 
windows could be opened again at last. 

There’s seldom been such a beautiful, warm, one can even 
say hot, Whitsun. The heat here in the “Secret Annexe” is terrible; I will briefly describe these warm days by giving you a 
sample of the sort of complaints that arise: 

Saturday: “Lovely, what perfect weather,” we all said in 
the morning. “If only it wasn’t quite so warm,” in the afternoon when the windows had to be closed. 

Sunday: “It’s positively unbearable, this heat. The butter’s 
melting, there’s not a cool spot anywhere in the house, the 
bread’s getting so dry, the milk’s going sour, windows can’t 
be opened, and we, wretched outcasts, sit here suffocating 
while other people enjoy their Whitsun holiday.” 

Monday: “My feet hurt me, I haven’t got any thin clothes. 
I can’t wash the dishes in this heat,” all this from Mrs. Van 
Daan. It was extremely unpleasant. 

I still can’t put up with heat and am glad that there’ s a stiff 
breeze today, and yet the sun still shines. 

Yours, Anne 



Monday , 5 June , 1944 

Dear Kitty, 

Fresh "Secret Annexe” troubles, a quarrel between Dussel 
and the Franks over something very trivial, the sharing out 
of the butter DusseFs capitulation. Mrs. Van Daan and the 
latter very thick, flirtations, kisses and friendly little laughs. 
Dussel is beginning to get longings for women. The Fifth 
Army has taken Rome. The city has been spared devastation 
by both armies and air forces, and is undamaged. Very few 
vegetables and potatoes. Bad weather. Heavy bombardments 
against the French coast and Pas de Calais continue. 

Yours, Anne 

Tuesday , 6 June , 1944 

Dear Kitty, 

"This is D-day,” came the announcement over the English 
news and quite rightly, "this is the day/ 51 The invasion has 
begun! 

The English gave the news at eight o’clock this morning: 
Calais, Boulogne, Le Havre, and Cherbourg, also the Pas de 
Calais (as usual), were heavily bombarded. Moreover, as a 
safety measure for all occupied territories, all people who live 
within a radius of thirty-five kilometers from the coast axe 
warned to be prepared for bombardments. If possible, the 
English will drop pamphlets one hour beforehand. 

According to German news, English parachute troops have 
landed on the French coast, English landing craft are in battle 
with the German Navy, says the B.B.C. 

We discussed it over the “Annexe” breakfast at nine o’clock: 
Is this just a trial landing like Dieppe two years ago? 

English broadcast in German, Dutch, French, and other 
languages at ten o’clock: “The invasion has begun!”~that 
means the “real” invasion. English broadcast in German at 
eleven o’clock, speech by the Supreme Commander, General 
Dwight Eisenhower. 

1 Ongmal English. 

The English news at twelve o’clock in English; “This is 
D-day.” General Eisenhower said to the French people: “Stiff 
fighting will come now, but after this the victory. The year 
1944 is the year of complete victory; good luck.” 1 

English news in English at one o’clock (translated) ; 11,000 
planes stand ready, and are flying to and fro non-stop, landing troops and attacking behind the lines; 4000 landing boats, 
plus small craft, are landing troops and materiel between 
Cherbourg and Le Havre incessantly. English and Am erican 
troops are already engaged in hard fighting. Speeches by Gerbrandy, by the Prime Minister of Belgium, King Haakon of 
Norway, De Gaulle of France, the King of England, and last, 
but not least, Churchill. 

Great commotion in the “Secret Annexe”! Would the longawaited liberation that has been talked of so much, but which 
still seems too wonderful, too much like a fairy tale, ever come 
true? Could we be granted victory this year, 1944? We don’t 
know yet, but hope is revived within us; it gives us fresh courage, and makes us strong again. Since we must put up bravely 
with all the fears, privations, and sufferings, the great thing 
now is to remain calm and steadfast. Now more than ever we 
must clench our teeth and not cry out. France, Russia, Italy, 
and Germany, too, can all cry out and give vent to their 
misery, but we haven’t the right to do that yet! 

Oh, Kitty, the best part of the invasion is that I have the 
feeling that friends are approaching. We have been oppressed 
by those terrible Germans for so long, they have had their 
knives so at our throats, that the thoughts of friends and delivery fills us with confidence! 

Now it doesn’t concern the Jews any more; no, it concerns 
Holland and all occupied Europe. Perhaps, Margot says, I 
may yet be able to go back to school in September or October. 

Yours, Anne 

P.S. I’ll keep you up to date with all the latest newsl 

Anginal English. 



Friday, 9 June , 1944 

Dear Kitty, 

Super news of the invasion. The Allies have taken Bayeux, 
a small village on the French coast, and are now fighting for 
Caen. It’s obvious that they intend to cut off the peninsular 
where Cherbourg lies. Every evening war correspondents give 
news from the battle front, telling us of the difficulties, courage, and enthusiasm of the army; they manage to get hold of 
the most incredible stories. Also some of the wounded who 
are already back in England again came to the microphone. 
The air force are up all the time in spite of the miserable 
weather. We heard over the B.B.C. that Churchill wanted to 
land with the troops on D-day, however, Eisenhower and the 
other generals managed to get him out of the idea. Just think 
of it, what pluck he has for such an old man-he must be 
seventy at least. 

The excitement here has worn off a bit; still, we re hoping 
that the war will be over at the end of this year. It’ll be about 
time too! Mrs. Van Daan’s grizzling is absolutely unbearable; 
now she can’t any longer drive us crazy over the invasion, she 
nags us the whole day long about the bad weather. It really 
would be nice to dump her in a bucket of cold water and put 
her up in the loft. 

The whole of the “Secret Annexe” except Van Daan and 
Peter have read the trilogy Hungarian Rhapsody. This book 
deals with the life history of the composer, virtuoso, and child 
prodigy, Franz Liszt. It is a very interesting book, but in my 
opinion there is a bit too much about women in it. In his time 
Liszt was not only the greatest and most famous pianist, but 
also the greatest ladies’ man-right up to the age of seventy. 
He lived with the Duchess Marie d’Agould, Princess Caroline 
Sayn-Wittgenstein, the dancer Lola Montez, the pianist Agnes 
Kingworth, the pianist Sophie Menter, Princess Olga Janina, 
Baroness Olga Meyendorff, the actress Lilia what’s-her-name, 
etc., etc.; it is just endless. The parts of the book that deal 
with music and art are much more interesting. Among those 
mentioned are Schumann, Clara Wieck, Hector Berlioz, 

Johannes Brahms, Beethoven, Joachim, Richard Wagner, 
Hans von Bulow, Anton Rubinstein, Frederic Chopin, Victor 
Hugo, Honore de Balzac, Hiller, Hummel, Czerny, Rossini, 
Cherubini, Paganini, Mendelssohn, etc., etc. 

Liszt was personally a fine man, very generous, and modest 
about himself though exceptionally vain. He helped everyone, 
his art was everything to him, he was mad about cognac and 
about women, could not bear to see tears, was a gentleman, 
would never refuse to do anyone a favor, didn’t care about 
money, loved religious liberty and world freedom. 

Yours, Anne 

Tuesday , IS June , 1944 

Dear Kitty, 

Another birthday has gone by, so now Fm fifteen. I received quite a lot of presents. 

All five parts of Sprenger’s History of Art , a set of underwear, a handkerchief, two bottles of yoghourt, a pot of jam, a 
spiced gingerbread cake, and a book on botany from Mummy 
and Daddy, a double bracelet from Margot, a book from the 
Van Daans, sweet peas from Dussel, sweets and exercise 
books from Miep and Elli and, the high spot of all, the book 
Maria Theresa and three slices of full-cream cheese from Kraler. A lovely bunch of peonies from Peter; the poor boy took a 
lot of trouble to try and find something, but didn’t have any 
luck. 

There’s still excellent news of the invasion, in spite of the 
wretched weather, countless gales, heavy rains, and high seas. 

Yesterday Churchill, Smuts, Eisenhower, and Arnold visited 
French villages which have been conquered and liberated. 
The torpedo boat that Churchill was in shelled the coast. He 
appears, like so many men, not to know what fear is— makes 
me envious! 

It’s difficult for us to judge from our secret redoubt how 
people outside have reacted to the news. Undoubtedly people 
are pleased that the idle (?) English have rolled up their 



sleeves and are doing something at last. Any Dutch people 
who still look down on the English, scoff at England and her 
government of old gentlemen, call the English cowards, and 
yet hate the Germans deserve a good shaking. Perhaps it 
would put some sense into their woolly brains. 

I hadn’t had a period for over two months, but it finally 
started again on Saturday. Still, in spite of all the unpleasantness and bother, I’m glad it hasn’t failed me any longer. 

Yours, Anne