Friday , 10 July, 1942

Dear Kitty, 

I expect I have thoroughly bored you with my long-winded 
descriptions of our dwelling. Rut still I think you should 
know where we’ve landed. 

Rut to continue my story— you see, I’ve not finished yet 
-when we arrived at the Prinsengracht, Miep took us quickly 
upstairs and into the "Secret Annexe.” She closed the door 
behind us and we were alone. Margot was already waiting 
for us, having come much faster on her bicycle. Our living 
room and all the other rooms were chock-full of rubbish, 
indescribably so. All the cardboard boxes which had been 
sent to the office in the previous months lay piled on the 
floor and the beds. The little room was filled to the ceiling 
with bedclothes. We had to start clearing up immediately, 
if we wished to sleep in decent beds that night. Mummy 
and Margot were not in a fit state to take part; they were 
tired and lay down on their beds, they were miserable, and 
lots more besides. Rut the two “clearers-up” of the family— 
Daddy and myself— wanted to start at once. 

The whole day long we unpacked boxes, filled cupboards, 
hammered and tidied, until we were dead beat. We sank into 
clean beds that night. We hadn’t had a bit of anything warm 
the whole day, but we didn’t care; Mummy and Margot were 
too tired and keyed up to eat, and Daddy and I were too 
busy. 

On Tuesday morning we went on where we left off the 
day before. Elli and Miep collected our rations for ns, Daddy 
improved the poor blackout, we scrubbed the kitchen floor, 
and were on the go the whole day long again. I hardly had 
time to think about the great change in my life until
Wednesday. Then I had a chance, for the first time since our 
arrival, to tell you all about it, and at the same time to realize 
myself what had actually happened to me and what was still 
going to happen. 

Yours, Anne 

Saturday , 11 July , 1942 

Dear Kitty, 

Daddy, Mummy, and Margot cant get used to the sound 
of the Westertoren clock yet, which tells us the time every 
quarter of an hour. I can. I loved it from the start, and 
especially in the night it's like a faithful friend. I expect 
you will be interested to hear what it feels like to "disappear"; 
well, all I can say is that I don’t know myself yet. I don’t 
think I shall ever feel really at home in this house, but 
that does not mean that I loathe it here, it is more like 
being on vacation in a very peculiar boardinghouse. Rather 
a mad idea, perhaps, but that is how it strikes me. The 
“Secret Annexe” is an ideal hiding place. Although it leans 
to one side and is damp, you’d never find such a comfortable 
hiding place anywhere in Amsterdam, no, perhaps not even 
in the whole of Holland. Our little room looked very bare 
at first with nothing on the walls; but thanks to Daddy 
who had brought my film-star collection and picture
postcards on beforehand, and with the aid of paste pot and 
brush, I have transformed the walls into one gigantic
picture. This makes it look much more cheerful, and, when 
the Van Daans come, we’ll get some wood from the attic, 
and make a few little cupboards for the walls and other odds 
and ends to make it look more lively. 

Margot and Mummy are a little bit better now. Mummy 
felt well enough to cook some soup for the first time 
yesterday, but then forgot all about it, while she was downstairs 
talking, so the peas were burned to a cinder and utterly 
refused to leave the pan. Mr. Koophuis has brought me a 
book called Young People’s Annual. The four of us went 
to the private office yesterday evening and turned on the 
radio. I was so terribly frightened that someone might hear 
it that I simply begged Daddy to come upstairs with me. 
Mummy understood how I felt and came too. We are very 
nervous in other ways, too, that the neighbors might hear 
us or see something going on. We made curtains straight 
away on the first day. Really one can hardly call them
curtains, they are just light, loose strips of material, all different 
shapes, quality, and pattern, which Daddy and I sewed together in a most unprofessional way. These works of art 
are fixed in position with drawing pins, not to come down 
until we emerge from here. 

There are some large business premises on the right of 
us, and on the left a furniture workshop; there is no one 
there after working hours but even so, sounds could travel 
through the walls. We have forbidden Margot to cough at 
night, although she has a bad cold, and make her swallow 
large doses of codeine. I am looking for Tuesday when the 
Van Daans arrive; it will be much more fun and not so quiet. 
It is the silence that frightens me so in the evenings and at 
night. I wish like anything that one of our protectors could 
sleep here at night. I can't tell you how oppressive it is 
never to be able to go outdoors, also Im very afraid that we 
shall be discovered and be shot. That is not exactly a pleasant 
prospect. We have to whisper and tread lightly during the 
day, otherwise the people in the warehouse might hear us. 

Someone is calling me. 

Yours, Anne 

Friday , 14 August , 1942 

Dear Kitty, 

I have deserted you for a whole month, but honestly, 
there is so little news here that I can’t find amusing things 
to tell you every day. The Van Daans arrived on July 13. We 
thought they were coming on the fourteenth, but between 
the thirteenth and sixteenth of July the Germans called up 
people right and left which created more and more unrest, 
so they played for safety, better a day too early than a day 
too late. At nine-thirty in the morning (we were still having 
breakfast) Peter arrived, the Van Daans’ son, not sixteen 
yet, a rather soft, shy, gawky youth; can’t expect much from 
his company. He brought his cat (Mouschi) with him. Mr. 
and Mrs. Van Daan arrived half an hour later, and to our 
great amusement she had a large pottie in her hat box. “I 
don’t feel at home anywhere without my chamber,” she 
declared, so it was the first thing to find its permanent
resting place under her divan. Mr. Van Daan did not bring his, 
but carried a folding tea table under his arm. 

From the day they arrived we all had meals cozily together 
and after three days it was just as if we were one large 
family. Naturally the Van Daans were able to tell us a lot 
about the extra week they had spent in the inhabited world. 
Among other things we were very interested to hear what 
had happened to our house and to Mr. Goudsmit. Mr. Van 
Daan told us: 

“Mr. Goudsmit phoned at nine o’clock on Monday morning and asked if I could come around. I went immediately 
and found G. in a state of great agitation. He let me read a 
letter that the Franks had left behind and wanted to take 
the cat to the neighbors as indicated in the letter, which 
pleased me. Mr. G. was afraid that the house would be 
searched so we went through all the rooms, tidied up a bit, 
and cleared away the breakfast things. Suddenly I discovered 
a writing pad on Mrs. Frank’s desk with an address in 
Maastricht written on it. Although I knew that this was 
done on purpose, I pretended to be very surprised and 
shocked and urged Mr. G. to tear up this unfortunate little 
piece of paper without delay. 

“I went on pretending that I knew nothing of your disappearance all the time, but after seeing the paper, I got a 
brain wave. ‘Mr. Goudsmit’—I said — it suddenly dawns on 
me what this address may refer to. Now it all comes back 
to me, a high-ranking officer was in the office about six 
months ago, he appeared to be very friendly with Mr. Frank 
and offered to help him, should the need arise. He was
stationed in Maastricht. I think he must have kept his word 
and somehow or other managed to get them into Belgium 
and then on to Switzerland. I should tell this to any friends 
who may inquire. Don’t, of course, mention Maastricht/ 

“With these words I left the house. Most of your friends 
know already, because I’ve been told myself several times 
by different people.” 

We were highly amused at the story and, when Mr. Van 
Daan gave us further details, laughed still more at the way 
people can let their imagination run away with them. One 
family had seen the pair of us pass on bicycles very early 
in the morning and another lady knew quite definitely that 
we were fetched by a military car in the middle of the night 

Yours, Anne 

Friday, 21 August , 1942 

Dear Kitty, 

The entrance to our hiding place has now been properly 
concealed. Mr. Kraler thought it would be better to put a 
cupboard in front of our door (because a lot of houses axe 
being searched for hidden bicycles), but of course it had to 
be a movable cupboard that can open like a door. 

Mr. Vossen made the whole thing. We had already let 
him into the secret and he can't do enough to help. If we 
want to go downstairs, we have to first bend down and then 
jump, because the step has gone. The first three days we 
were all going about with masses of lumps on our foreheads, 
because we all knocked ourselves against the low doorway. 
Now we have nailed a cloth filled with wood wool against 
the top of the door. Let’s see if that helps! 
I’m not working much at present; Im giving myself
holidays until September. Then Daddy is going to give me
lessons; it's shocking how much I’ve forgotten already. There 
is little change in our life here. Mr. Van Daan and I usually 
manage to upset each other, its just the opposite with 
Margot whom he likes very much. Mummy sometimes treats 
me just like a baby, which I can’t bear. Otherwise things are 
going better. I still don’t like Peter any more, he is so boring; 
he flops lazily on his bed half the time, does a bit of carpentry, and then goes back for another snooze. What a fool! 

It is lovely weather and in spite of everything we make 
the most we can of it by lying on a camp bed in the attic, 
where the sun shines through an open window. 

Yours, Anne 

Wednesday , 2 September , 1942 

Dear Kitty, 

Mr. and Mrs. Van Daan have had a terrific quarrel, I’ve 
never seen anything quite like it before. Mummy and Daddy 
would never dream of shouting at each other. The cause 
was so trivial that the whole thing was a pure waste of breath. 
But, still, everyone to his own liking. 

Naturally it is very unpleasant for Peter, who has to stand 
by. No one takes him seriously, he is so frightfully touchy 
and lazy. Yesterday he was badly upset because he found 
that his tongue was blue instead of red; this unusual
phenomenon of nature disappeared just as quickly as it had come. 
Today he is going about with a scarf on, as he has a stiff 
neck; in addition “M’lord” complains of lumbago. Pains 
around the heart, kidneys, and lungs are not unusual either, 
he is a real hypochondria (that’s the word for such people, 
isn’t it?)! It is not all honey between Mummy and Mrs. 
Van Daan; there is plenty of cause for unpleasantness. To 
give a small example, I will tell you that Mrs. Van Daan has 
taken all three of her sheets out of the common linen
cupboard. She takes it for granted that Mummy’s sheets will do 
for all of us. It will be a nasty surprise for her when she finds 
that Mummy has followed her good example. 

Also, she is thoroughly piqued that her dinner service 
and not ours is in use. She is always trying to find out where 
we have actually put our plates; they are closer than she 
thinks, they are in a cardboard box behind a lot of junk in 
the attic. Our plates are unget-at-able as long as we are 
here, and a good thing too. I always have bad luck; I smashed 
one of Mrs. Van Daan’s soup plates into a thousand pieces 
yesterday. “Oh!” she cried angrily. “Couldn't you be
careful for once— that's the last one I've got.” Mr. Van Daan 
is all sugar to me nowadays. Long may it last. Mummy gave 
me another frightful sermon this morning; I can't bear them. 
Our ideas are completely opposite. Daddy is a darling,
although he can sometimes be angry with me for five minutes 
on end. Last week we had a httle interruption in our
monotonous life; it was over a book about women-and Peter. 
First I must tell you that Margot and Peter are allowed to 
read nearly all the books that Mr. Koophuis lends us, but 
the grownups held back this particular book on the subject 
of women. Peter s curiosity was aroused at once. What was 
it the two of them were not allowed to read in this book? 
He got hold of the book on the sly, while his mother was 
downstairs talking, and disappeared with his booty to the 
attic. All went well for a few days. His mother knew what 
he was doing, but didn't tell tales, until Father found out. 
He was very angry, took the book away, and thought that 
that would finish the whole business. However, he had not 
allowed for his sons curiosity, which waxed rather than 
waned because of his father's attitude. Peter, determined to 
finish it, thought of a way to get hold of this enthralling 
book. In the meantime, Mrs. Van Daan had asked Mummy 
what she thought about it all. Mummy thought this
particular book was not suitable for Margot, but she saw no 
harm in letting her read most books. 

“There is a great difference, Mrs. Van Daan,” said 
Mummy, “between Margot and Peter. In the first place, 
Margot is a girl and girls are always more grownup than 
boys, secondly, Margot has read quite a lot of serious books, 
and does not go in search of things that are forbidden her, 
and thirdly, Margot is far more developed and intelligent, 
shown by the fact of her being in the fourth form at school.” 
Mrs, Van Daan agreed, but still thought it was wrong in 
principle to let children read books which were written for 
grownups. 

In the meantime Peter had found a time of the day when 
no one bothered about him or the book: seven-thirty in the 
evening— then everyone was in the private office listening 
to the radio. That was when he took his treasure to the 
attic, again. He should have been downstairs again by eightthirty, but because the book was so thrilling he forgot the 
time and was just coming downstairs as his father came into 
the room. You can imagine the consequences! With a slap 
and a snatch, the book lay on the table and Peter was in the 
attic. That’s how matters stood as we sat down to table. 
Peter stayed upstairs~no one bothered about him, and he 
had to go to bed without any supper. We went on with the 
meal, chattering gaily, when suddenly we heard a piercing 
whistle; we all stopped eating and looked with pale changed 
faces from one to another. Then we heard Peter’s voice,
calling down the chimney, “I say, I’m not coming down anyway.” 
Mr. Van Daan sprang to his feet, his napkin fell to the floor, 
and scarlet in the face he shouted, Tve had enough of 
this.” Daddy took his arm, afraid of what might happen, and 
the two men went together to the attic. After a good deal of 
resistance and stamping, Peter landed up in his room with 
the door closed and we went on eating. Mrs. Van Daan 
wanted to save one slice of bread for the dear boy, but his 
father stood firm. “If he doesn’t apologize soon, he will have 
to sleep in the attic.” Loud protests from the rest of us, as 
we thought missing supper was quite enough punishment. 
Besides, Peter might catch cold and we couldn’t call a doctor. 

Peter did not apologize; he was already in the attic. Mr. 
Van Daan did nothing more about it, but I noticed the next 
morning that Peter s bed had been slept in. Peter was back 
in the attic at seven o’clock, but Daddy managed with a 
few friendly words to persuade him to come down again. 
Sour faces and obstinate silences for three days and then 
everything went smoothly once more. 

Yours, Anne 

Monday , 21 September , 1942 

Dear Kitty, 

Today fm going to tell you our general news. 

Mrs. Van Daan is unbearable. I get nothing but "blowups” from her for my continuous chatter. She is always
pestering us in some way or other. This is the latest, she doesn't 
want to wash up the pans if there is a fragment left; instead 
of putting it into a glass dish, as we’ve always done until 
now, she leaves it in the pan to go bad. 

After the next meal Margot sometimes has about seven 
pans to wash up and then Madame says: "Well, well,
Margot, you have got a lot to do!” 

I’m busy with Daddy working out his family tree: as we 
go along he tells me little bits about everyone— it’s terribly 
interesting. Mr. Koophuis brings a few special books for me 
every other week. I’m thrilled with the Joop ter Heul series. 
I’ve enjoyed the whole of Cissy van Marxveldt very much. 
And I’ve read Een Zomerzotheid four times and I still laugh 
about some of the ludicrous situations that arise. 

Term time has begun again, I’m working hard at my 
French and manage to pump in five irregular verbs per day. 
Peter sighs and groans over his English. A few schoolbooks 
have just arrived; we have a good stock of exercise books, 
pencils, rubbers, and labels, as I brought these with me. I 
sometimes listen to the Dutch news from London, heard 
Prince Bernhard recently. He said that Princess Juliana is 
expecting a baby about next January. I think it is lovely; it 
surprises the others that I should be so keen on the Royal 
Family. 

I was being discussed and they decided that I’m not
completely stupid after all, which had the effect of making me 
work extra hard the next day. I certainly don’t want to 
still be in the first form when Im fourteen or fifteen. 

Also the fact that Im hardly allowed to read any decent 
books was mentioned. Mummy is reading Heeren, Vromoen 
en Knechten now, which Im not allowed (Margot is). First 
I must be more developed, like my talented sister. Then we 
talk about my ignorance of philosophy and psychology, about 
which I know nothing. Perhaps by next year I shall be 
wiser! (I looked up these difficult words quickly in Koenen.) 

I have just woken up to the disturbing fact that I have 
one long-sleeved dress and three cardigans for the winter. 
I’ve received permission from Daddy to knit a jumper of 
white sheep’s wool; it’s not very nice wool, but as long as it’s 
warm that’s all that matters. We have some clothes
deposited with friends, but unfortunately we shall not see them 
until after the war, that is if they are still there then. I had 
just written something about Mrs. Van Daan when in she 
came. Slap! I closed the book. “Hey, Anne, can’t I just have 
a look?” 

“I’m afraid not.” 

“Just the last page then?” 

“No, I’m sorry.” 

Naturally it gave me a frightful shock, because there was 
an unflattering description of her on this particular page. 

Yours, Anne