Wednesday, 8 July, 1942

Dear Kitty, 

Years seem to have passed between Sunday and now. So 
much has happened, it is just as if the whole world had 
turned upside down. But I am still alive, Kitty, and that is the 
main thing, Daddy says. 

Yes, I'm still alive, indeed, but don't ask where or how. 
You wouldn't understand a word, so I will begin by telling 
you what happened on Sunday afternoon. 

At three o'clock (Harry had just gone, but was coming 
back later) someone rang the front doorbell. I was lying lazily 
reading a book on the veranda in the sunshine, so I didn't 
hear it. A bit later, Margot appeared at the kitchen door
looking very excited. “The S.S. have sent a call-up notice for 
Daddy,” she whispered. “Mummy has gone to see Mr. Van 
Daan already.” (Van Daan is a friend who works with Daddy 
in the business.) It was a great shock to me, a call-up; every 
one knows what that means. I picture concentration camps 
and lonely cells-should we allow him to be doomed to this? 
“Of course he won't go,” declared Margot, while we waited 
together. “Mummy has gone to the Van Daans to discuss 
whether we should move into our hiding place tomorrow. 
The Van Daans are going with us, so we shall be seven in all.” 
Silence. We couldn’t talk any more, thinking about Daddy, 
who, little knowing what was going on, was visiting some old 
people in the Joodse Invalide; waiting for Mummy, the heat 
and suspense, all made us very overawed and silent. 

Suddenly the bell rang again. “That is Harry,” I said. 
“Don't open the door.” Margot held me back, but it was not 
necessary as we heard Mummy and Mr. Van Daan downstairs, talking to Harry, then they came in and closed the door 
behind them. Each time the bell went, Margot or I had to 
creep softly down to see if it was Daddy, not opening the door 
to anyone else. 

Margot and I were sent out of the room. Van Daan wanted 
to talk to Mummy alone. When we were alone together in 
our bedroom, Margot told me that the call-up was not for 
Daddy, but for her. I was more frightened than ever and
began to cry. Margot is sixteen; would they really take girls of 
that age away alone? But thank goodness she won't go, 
Mummy said so herself, that must be what Daddy meant 
when he talked about us going into hiding. 

Into hiding-where would we go, in a town or the country, 
in a house or a cottage, when, how, where . . .? 

These were questions I was not allowed to ask, but I 
couldn’t get them out of my mind. Margot and I began to 
pack some of our most vital belongings into a school satchel. 
The first thing I put in was this diary, then hair curlers,
handkerchiefs, schoolbooks, a comb, old letters; I put in the 
craziest things with the idea that we were going into hiding. 
But I’m not sorry, memories mean more to me than dresses. 

At five o’clock Daddy finally arrived, and we phoned Mr. 
Koophuis to ask if he could come around in the evening. Van 
Daan went and fetched Miep, Miep has been in the business 
with Daddy since 1933 and has become a close friends,
likewise her brand-new husband, Henk. Miep came and took 
some shoes, dresses, coats, underwear, and stockings away in 
her bag, promising to return in the evening. Then silence fell 
on the house; not one of us felt like eating anything, it was 
still hot and everything was very strange. We let our large upstairs room to a certain Mr. Goudsmit, a divorced man in his 
thirties, who appeared to have nothing to do -on this
particular evening; we simply could not get rid of him without being 
rude; he hung about until ten o’clock. At eleven o’clock Miep 
and Henk Van Santen arrived. Once again, shoes, stockings, 
books, and underclothes disappeared mto Miep’s bag and 
Henk’s deep pockets, and at eleven-thirty they too
disappeared. I was dog-tired and although I knew that it would he 
my last night in my own bed, I fell asleep immediately and 
didn’t wake up until Mummy called me at five-thirty the next 
morning. Luckily it was not so hot as Sunday; warm ram fell 
steadily all day. We put on heaps of clothes as if we were going to the North Pole, the sole reason being to take clothes 
with us. No Jew in our situation would have dreamed of going out with a suitcase full of clothing. I had on two vests, 
three pairs of pants, a dress, on top of that a skirt, jacket, 
summer coat, two pairs of stockings, lace-up shoes, woolly 
cap, scarf, and still more; I was nearly stifled before we 
started, but no one inquired about that. 

Margot filled ber satchel with schoolbooks, fetched her 
bicycle, and rode off behind Miep into the unknown, as far 
as I was concerned. You see I still didn't know where our 
secret hiding place was to be. At seven-thirty the door closed 
behind us. Moortje, my little cat, was the only creature to 
whom I said farewell. She would have a good home with the 
neighbors. This was all written in a letter addressed to Mr. 
Goudsmit. 

There was one pound of meat in the kitchen for the cat, 
breakfast things lying on the table, stripped beds, all giving 
the impression that we had left helter-skelter. But we didn't 
care about impressions, we only wanted to get away, only 
escape and arrive safely, nothing else. Continued tomorrow. 

Yours, Anne 

Thursday , 9 July , 1942 

Dear Kitty, 

So we walked in the pouring rain, Daddy, Mummy, and 
I, each with a school satchel and shopping bag filled to the 
brim with all kinds of things thrown together anyhow. 

We got sympathetic looks from people on their way to 
work. You could see by their faces how sorry they were they 
couldn’t offer us a lift; the gaudy yellow star spoke for itself. 

Only when we were on the road did Mummy and Daddy 
begin to tell me bits and pieces about the plan. For months 
as many of our goods and chattels and necessities of life as 
possible had been sent away and they were sufficiently ready 
for us to have gone into hiding of our own accord on July 16. 
The plan had had to be speeded up ten days because of the 
call-up, so our quarters would not be so well organized, but 
we had to make the best of it. The hiding place itself would 
be in the building where Daddy has his office. It will be hard 
for outsiders to understand, but I shall explain that later on. 
Daddy didn’t have many people working for him. Mr. Kraler, 
Koophuis, Miep, and E1H Vossen, a twenty-three-year-old 
typist who all knew of our arrival. Mr. Vossen, Ellfs father, 
and two boys worked in the warehouse; they had not been 
told. 

I will describe the building: there is a large warehouse on 
the ground floor which is used as a store. The front door to 
the house is next to the warehouse door, and inside the front 
door is a second doorway which leads to a staircase (a). 
There is another door at the top of the stairs, with a frosted 
glass window in it, which has “Office” written in black letters 
across it. That is the large main office, very big, very light, and 
very full. Elli, Miep, and Mr. Koophuis work there in the daytime. A small dark room containing the safe, a wardrobe, and 
a large cupboard leads to a small somewhat dark second office. 
Mr. Kraler and Mr. Van Daan used to sit here, now it is only 
Mr. Kraler. One can reach Kraler s office from the passage, 
but only via a glass door which can be opened from the inside, 
but not easily from the outside. 

From Kraler’s office a long passage goes past the coal store, 
up four steps and leads to the showroom of the whole building: the private office. Dark, dignified furniture, linoleum 
and carpets on the floor, radio, smart lamp, everything firstclass. Next door there is a roomy kitchen with a hot-water 
faucet and a gas stove. Next door the W.C. That is the first 
floor. 

A wooden staircase leads from the downstairs passage to 
the next floor (b). There is a small landing at the top. There 
is a door at each end of the landing, the left one leading to a 
storeroom at the front of the house and to the attics. One of 
those really steep Dutch staircases runs from the side to the 
other door opening on to the street (c). 

The right-hand door leads to our “Secret Annexe.” No one 
would ever guess that there would be so many rooms hidden 
behind that plain gray door. There s a little step in front of 
the door and then you are inside. 

There is a steep staircase immediately opposite the entrance (e). On the left a tiny passage brings you into a room 
which was to become the Frank family's bed-sitting-room, 
next door a smaller room, study and bedroom for the two 
young ladles of the f amil y. On the right a little room without 
windows containing the washbasin and a small W.C.
compartment, with another door leading to Margot’s and my 
room. If you go up the next flight of stairs and open the door, 
you are simply amazed that there could be such a big light 
room in such an old house by the canal. There is a gas stove 
in this room (thanks to the fact that it was used as a laboratory)
and a sink. This is now the kitchen for the Van Daan 
couple, besides being general living room, dining room, and 
scullery. 

A tiny little corridor room will become Peter Van Daan s 
apartment. Then, just as on the lower landing, there is a 
large attic. So there you are, I’ve introduced you to the whole 
of our beautiful "Secret Annexe." 

Yours, Anne