Saturday, 20 June, 1942

I haven’t written for a few days, because I wanted first of 
all to think about my diary. It’s an odd idea for someone like 
me to keep a diary; not only because I have never done so 
before, but because it seems to me that neither I-nor for 
that matter anyone else— will be interested in the unbosomings
of a thirteen-year-old schoolgirl. Still, what does that matter? I want to write, but more than that, I want to bring out 
all kinds of things that lie buried deep in my heart. 

There is a saying that ‘paper is more patient than man”; 
it came back to me on one of my slightly melancholy days, 
while I sat chin in hand, feeling too bored and limp even to 
make up my mind whether to go out or stay at home. Yes, 
there is no doubt that paper is patient and as I don’t intend 
to show this cardboard-covered notebook, bearing the proud 
name of “diary,” to anyone, unless I find a real friend, boy or 
girl, probably nobody cares. And now I come to the root of 
the matter, the reason for my starting a diary: it is that I have 
no such real friend. 

Let me put it more clearly, since no one will believe that a 
girl of thirteen feels herself quite alone in the world, nor is it 
sq. I have darling parents and a sister of sixteen. I know about 
thirty people whom one might call friends-I have strings of 
boy friends, anxious to catch a glimpse of me and who, failing 
that, peep at me through mirrors in class. I have relations, 
aunts and uncles, who are darlings too, a good home, no— I 
don’t seem to lack anything. But it’s the same with all my 
friends, just fun and joking, nothing more. I can never bring 
myself to talk of anything outside the common round. We 
don’t seem to be able to get any closer, that is the root of the 
trouble. Perhaps I lack confidence, but anyway, there it is, a 
stubborn fact and I don’t seem to be able to do anything 
about it. 

Hence, this diary. In order to enhance in my mind’s eye the 
picture of the friend for whom I have waited so long, I don’t 
want to set down a series of bald facts in a diary like most 
people do, but I want this diary itself to be my friend, and I 
shall call my friend Kitty. No one will grasp what I’m talking 
about if I begin my letters to Kitty just out of the blue, so 
albeit unwillingly, I will start by sketching in brief the story 
of my life. 

My father was thirty-six when he married my mother, who 
was then twenty-five. My sister Margot was born in 1926 in 
Frankfort-on-Main, I followed on June 12, 1929, and, as we 
are Jewish, we emigrated to Holland in 1933, where my father 
was appointed Managing Director of Travies N.V. This firm 
is in close relationship with the firm of Kolen & Co. in the 
same building, of which my father is a partner. 

The rest of our family, however, felt the full impact of 
Hitler’s anti-Jewish laws, so life was filled with anxiety. In 
1938 after the pogroms, my two uncles (my mothers 
brothers) escaped to the U.S.A. My old grandmother came 
to us, she was then seventy-three. After May 1940 good times 
rapidly fled: first the war, then the capitulation, followed by 
the arrival of the Germans, which is when the sufferings of us 
Jews really began. Anti-Jewish decrees followed each other in 
quick succession. Jews must wear a yellow star, 1 Jews must 
hand in their bicycles, Jews are banned from trains and are 
forbidden to drive. Jews are only allowed to do their shopping 
between three and five o’clock and then only in shops which 
bear the placard “Jewish shop.” Jews must be indoors by eight 
o’clock and cannot even sit in their own gardens after that 
to distinguish them from others, all Jews were forced by the Germans to 
wear, prominently displayed, a yellow six-pointed star. 

hour. Jews are forbidden to visit theaters, cinemas, and other 
places of entertainment. Jews may not take part in public 
sports. Swimming baths, tennis courts, hockey fields, and 
other sports grounds are all prohibited to them. Jews may not 
visit Christians. Jews must go to Jewish schools, and many 
more restrictions of a similar kind. 

So we could not do this and were forbidden to do that. But 
life went on in spite of it all. Jopie used to say to me, "You’re 
scared to do anything, because it may be forbidden." Our 
freedom was strictly limited. Yet things were still bearable. 

Granny died in January 1942; no one will ever know how 
much she is present in my thoughts and how much I love her 
still. 

In 1934 I went to school at the Montessori Kindergarten 
and continued there. It was at the end of the school year, I 
was in form 6B, when I had to say good-by to Mrs. K. We 
both wept, it was very sad. In 1941 I went, with my sister 
Margot, to the Jewish Secondary School, she into the fourth 
form and I into the first. 

So far everything is all right with the four of us and here I 
come to the present day. 

Saturday , 20 June , 1942 

Dear Kitty, 

I’ll start straight away. It is so peaceful at the moment, 
Mummy and Daddy are .out and Margot has gone to play 
ping-pong with some friends. 

I’ve been playing ping-pong a lot myself lately, We pingpongers are very partial to an ice cream, especially in summer, 
when one gets warm at the game, so we usually finish up with 
a visit to the nearest ice-cream shop, Delphi or Oasis, where 
Jews are allowed. We’ve given up scrounging for extra pocket 
money. Oasis is usually full and among our large circle of 
friends we always manage to find some kindhearted gentleman or boy friend, who presents us with more ice cream than 
we could devour m a week. 

I expect you will be rather surprised at the fact that I 
should talk of boy friends at my age. Alas, one simply cant 
seem to avoid it at our school As soon as a boy asks if he may 
bicycle home with me and we get into conversation, nine out 
of ten times I can be sure that he will fall head over heels in 
love immediately and simply won t allow me out of his sight. 
After a while it cools down of course, especially as I take little 
notice of ardent looks and pedal blithely on. 

If it gets so far that they begin about “asking Father” I 
swerve slightly on my bicycle, my satchel falls, the young man 
is bound to get off and hand it to me, by which time I have 
introduced a new topic of conversation. 

These are the most innocent types; you get some who blow 
kisses or try to get hold of your arm, but then they are definitely
knocking at the wrong door. I get off my bicycle and 
refuse to go further m their company, or I pretend to be insulted
and tell them in no uncertain terms to clear off. 

There, the foundation of our friendship is laid, till tomorrow.

Yours, Anne