Saturday, 19 February, 1944

Dear Kitty, 

It is Saturday again and that really speaks for itself. 

The morning was quiet. I helped a bit upstairs, but I didn’t 
have more than a few fleeting words with “him.” At half past 
two, when everyone had gone to their own rooms, either to 
sleep or to read, I went to the private office, with my blanket 
and everything, to sit at the desk and read or write. It was 
not long before it all became too much for me, my head 
drooped on to my arm, and I sobbed my heart out. The tears 
streamed down my cheeks and I felt desperately unhappy. 
Oh, if only “he” had come to comfort me. It was four o’clock 
by the time I went upstairs again. I went for some potatoes, 
with fresh hope in my heart of a meeting, but while I was still 
smartening up my hair in the bathroom he went down to see 
Boche in the warehouse. 

Suddenly I felt the tears coming back and I hurried to the 
lavatory, quickly grabbing a pocket mirror as I passed. There 
I sat then, fully dressed, while the tears made dark spots on 
the red of my apron, and I felt very wretched. 

This is what was going through my mind. Oh, I’ll never 
reach Peter like this. Who knows, perhaps he doesn’t like me 
at all and doesn’t need anyone to confide in. Perhaps he only 
thinks about me in a casual sort of way. I shall have to go on 
alone once more, without friendship and without Peter. Perhaps soon I’ll be without hope, without comfort, or anything 
to look forward to again. Oh, if I could nestle my head against 
his shoulder and not feel so hopelessly alone and desertedl 


Who knows, perhaps he doesn’t care about me at all and 
looks at the others m just the same way Perhaps I only 
imagined that it was especially for me? Oh, Peter, if only you 
could see or hear me. If the truth were to prove as bad as that, 
it would be more than I could bear. 

However, a little later fresh hope and anticipation seemed 
to return, even though the tears were still streaming down 
my cheeks. 

Yours, Anne