Tuesday , 7 March, 1944

Dear Kitty, 

If I think now of my life in 1942, it all seems so unreal. 
It was quite a different Anne who enjoyed that heavenly 
existence from the Anne who has grown wise within these 
walls. Yes, it was a heavenly life. Boy friends at every turn, 
about twenty friends and acquaintances of my own age, the 
darling of nearly all the teachers, spoiled from top to toe by 
Mummy and Daddy, lots of sweets, enough pocket money, 
what more could one want? 

You will certainly wonder by what means I got around all 
these people. Peter s word 4 attractiveness” is not altogether 
true. All Hie teachers were entertained by my cute answers, 
my amusing remarks, my smiling face, and my questioning 
looks. That is all I was— a terrible flirt, coquettish and amusing. I had one or two advantages, which kept me rather in 
favor. I was industrious, honest, and frank. I would never 
have dreamed of cribbing from anyone else. I shared my 
sweets generously, and I wasn’t conceited. 

Wouldn’t I have become rather forward with so much 
admiration? It was a good thing that in the midst of, at the 
height of, all this gaiety, I suddenly had to face reality, and 
it took me at least a year to get used to the fact that there 
was no more admiration forthcoming. 

How did I appear at school? The one who thought of new 
jokes and pranks, always “king of the castle,” never in a bad 
mood, never a crybaby. No wonder everyone liked to cycle 
with me, and I got their attentions. 

Now I look back at that Anne as an amusing, but very 



superficial girl, who has nothing to do with the Anne of 
today. Peter said quite rightly about me: “If ever I saw you, 
you were always surrounded by two or more boys and a 
whole troupe of girls. You were always laughing and always 
the center of everything!” 

What is left of this girl? Oh, don't worry, I haven't forgotten how to laugh or to answer back readily. I'm just as 
good, if not better, at criticizing people, and I can still flirt 
if ... I wish. That’s not it though, I’d like that sort of life 
again for an evening, a few days, or even a week, the life 
which seems so carefree and gay. But at the end of that 
week, I should be dead beat and would be only too thankful 
to listen to anyone who began to talk about something sensible. I don’t want followers, but friends, admirers who fall 
not for a flattering smile but for what one does and for one’s 
character. 

I know quite well that the circle around me would be 
much smaller. But what does that matter, as long as one still 
keeps a few sincere friends? 

Yet I wasn’t entirely happy in 1942 m spite of everything; 
I often felt deserted, but because I was on the go the whole 
day long, I didn’t think about it and enjoyed myself as much 
as I could. Consciously or unconsciously, I tried to drive 
away the emptiness I felt with jokes and pranks. Now I think 
seriously about life and what I have to do. One period of my 
life is over forever. The carefree schooldays are gone, never 
to return. 

I don’t even long for them any more; I have outgrown 
them, I can’t just only enjoy myself as my serious side is always there. 

I look upon my life up till the New Year, as it were, through 
a powerful magnifying glass. The sunny life at home, then 
coming here in 1942, the sudden change, the quarrels, the 
bickerings. I couldn’t understand it, I was taken by surprise, 
and the only way I could keep up some bearing was by being 
impertinent. 

The first half of 1943. my fits of crying, the loneliness, how 
I slowly began to see all my faults and shortcomings, which 



are so great and which seemed much greater then. During 
the day I deliberately talked about anything and everything 
that was farthest from my thoughts, tried to draw Pim to me; 
but couldn't. Alone I had to face the difficult task of changing myself, to stop the everlasting reproaches, which were so 
oppressive and which reduced me to such terrible despondency. 

Things improved slightly in the second half of the year, I 
became a young woman and was treated more like a grownup. 
I started to think, and write stories, and came to the conclusion that the others no longer had the right to throw 
me about like an india-rubber ball. I wanted to change in 
accordance with my own desires. But one thing that struck 
me even more was when I realized that even Daddy would 
never become my confidant over everything. I didn’t want to 
trust anyone but myself any more. 

At the beginning of the New Year: the second great 
change, my dream. . . . And with it I discovered my longing, 
not for a girl friend, but for a boy friend. I also discovered 
my inward happiness and my defensive armor of superficiality 
and gaiety. In due time I quieted down and discovered my 
boundless desire for all that is beautiful and good. 

And in the evening, when I lie in bed and end my prayers 
with the words, “I thank you, God, for all that is good and 
dear and beautiful,” I am filled with joy. Then I think about 
“the good” of going into hiding, of my health and with 
my whole being of the “dearness” of Peter, of that which 
is still embryonic and impressionable and which we neither 
of us dare to name or touch, of that which will come sometime; love, the future, happiness and of "the beauty” which 
exists in the world; the world, nature, beauty and all, all that 
is exquisite and fine. 

I don’t think then of all the misery, hut of the beauty that 
still remains. This is one of the things that Mummy and I 
are so entirely different about. Her counsel when one feels 
melancholy is: "Think of all the misery in the world and be 
thankful that you are not sharing in it!” My advice is: "Go 
outside, to the fields, enjoy nature and the sunshine, go out 
and try to recapture happiness in yourself and in God. Think 
of all the beauty that's still left in and around you and be 
happy!” 

I don’t see how Mummy’s idea can be right, because then 
how are you supposed to behave if you go through the misery 
yourself? Then you are lost. On the contrary, I’ve found 
that there is always some beauty left-in nature, sunshine, 
freedom, in yourself; these can all help you. Look at these 
things, then you find yourself again, and God, and then you 
regain your balance. 

And whoever is happy will make others happy too. He 
who has courage and faith will never perish in misery! 

Yours, Anne 

Sunday , 12 March , 1944 

Dear Kitty, 

I can’t seem to sit still lately; I run upstairs and down and 
then back again. I love talking to Peter, but Tm always 
afraid of being a nuisance. He has told me a bit about the 
past, about his parents and about himself. Its not half 
enough though and I ask myself why it is that I always long 
for more. He used to think I was unbearable; and I returned 
the compliment; now I have changed my opinion, has he 
changed his too? 

I think so; still it doesn’t necessarily mean that we shall 
become great friends, although as far as I am concerned it 
would make the time here much more bearable. But still, 
I won’t get myself upset about it— I see quite a lot of^him 
and there’s no need to make you unhappy about it too, Kitty, 
just because I feel so miserable. 

On Saturday afternoon I felt in such a whirl, after hearing 
a whole lot of sad news, that I went and lay on my divan for 
a sleep. I only wanted to sleep to stop myself thinking. I slept 
till four o’clock, then I had to go into the living room. I 
found it difficult to answer all Mummy’s questions and think 

of some little excuse to tell Daddy, as an explanation for 
my long sleep. I resorted to a “headache,” which wasn't a lie, 
as I had one . . . but insidel 

Ordinary people, ordinary girls, teen-agers like myself, will 
think fm a bit cracked with all my self-pity. Yes, that's 
what it is, but I pour out my heart to you, then for the rest 
of the day I’m as impudent, gay, and self-confident as I can 
be, in order to avoid questions and getting on my own nerves. 

Margot is very sweet and would like me to trust her, but 
still, I can't tell her everything. She's a darling, she's good 
and pretty, but she lacks the nonchalance for conducting 
deep discussions; she takes me so seriously, much too seriously, and then thinks about her queer little sister for a long 
time afterwards, looks searchingly at me, at every word I say, 
and keeps on thinking: “Is this just a joke or does she really 
mean it?” I think that's because we are together the whole 
day long, and that if I trusted someone completely, then 
I shouldn’t want them hanging around me all the time. 

When shall I finally untangle my thoughts, when shall I 
find peace and rest within myself again? 

Yours, Ann© 

Tuesday , 14 March , 1944 

Dear Kitty, 

Perhaps it would be entertaining for you— though not in 
the least for me-to hear what we are going to eat today. As 
the charwoman is at work downstairs. I'm sitting on the 
Van Daans' table at the moment. I have a handkerchief 
soaked m some good scent (bought before we came here) 
over my mouth and held against my nose. You won't gather 
much Rom this, so let's “begin at the beginning." 

The people from whom we obtained food coupons have 
been caught, so we just have our five ration cards and no 
extra coupons, and no fats. As both Miep and Koophuis are 
ill, Elli hasn’t time to do any shopping, so the atmosphere 
is dreary and dejected, and so is the food. From tomorrow 



we shall not have a scrap of fat, butter, or margarine left. We 
can't have fried potatoes (to save bread) for breakfast any 
longer, so we have porridge instead, and as Mrs. Van Daan 
thinks were starving, we have bought some full cream mflV 
“under the counter," Our supper today consists of a hash 
made from kale which has been preserved in a barrel. Hence 
the precautionary measure with the handkerchief! It's incredible how kale can stink when it's a year old! The smell 
in the room is a mixture of bad plums, strong preservatives, 
and rotten eggs. Ugh! the mere thought of eating that muck 
makes me feel sick. 

Added to this, our potatoes are suffering from such peculiar 
diseases that out of two buckets of pommes de terre , one 
whole one ends up on the stove. We amuse ourselves by 
searching for all the different kinds of diseases, and have 
come to the conclusion that they range from cancer and 
smallpox to measles! Oh, no, its no joke to be in hiding 
during the fourth year of the war. If only the whole rotten 
business was over! 

Quite honestly, I wouldn't care so much about the food, 
if only it were more pleasant here in other ways. There's the 
rub. this tedious existence is beginning to make us all touchy. 

The following are the views of the five grownups on the 
present situation: 

Mrs. Van Daan: “The job as queen of the kitchen lost its 
attraction a long time ago. It's dull to sit and do nothing, 
so I go back to my cooking again. Still, I have to complain 
that it’s impossible to cook without any fats, and all these 
nasty smells make me feel sick. Nothing but ingratitude and 
rude remarks do I get in return for my services. I am always 
the black sheep, always the guilty one. Moreover, according 
to me, very little progress is being made in the war, in the 
end the Germans will still win. I’m afraid were going to 
starve, and if I'm in a had mood I scold everyone." 

Mr. Van Daan: “I must smoke and smoke and smoke, and 
then the food, the political situation, and Kerli's moods 
don't seem so had. Kerli is a darling wife.” 

But if he hasn't anything to smoke, then nothing is right, 



and this is what one hears: Tm getting ill, we don’t live 
well enough, I must have meat. Frightfully stupid person, 
my Kerli!” After this a terrific quarrel is sure to follow. 

Mrs. Frank: "Food is not very important, but I would 
love a slice of rye bread now, I feel so terribly hungry. If I 
were Mrs. Van Daan I would have put a stop to Mr. Van 
Daan’s everlasting smoking a long time ago. But now I must 
definitely have a cigarette, because my nerves are getting 
the better of me. The English make a lot of mistakes, but 
still the war is progressing. I must have a chat and be thankful Im not in Poland” 

Mr. Frank. "Everything’s all right. I don’t require anything. Take it easy, we’ve ample time. Give me my potatoes 
and then I will keep my mouth shut. Put some of my rations 
on one side for Elli. The political situation is very promising, I’m extremely optimistic!” 

Mr. Dussel: "I must get my task for today, everything must 
be finished on time. Political situation ‘outschtanding’ and it 
is eempossible’ that we’ll be caught. 

“I, I, I ... 1” 

Yours, Anne 

Wednesday , 15 March , 1944 

Dear Kitty, 

Phew! Oh dear, oh dear-released from the somber scenes 
for a moment! Today I hear nothing but "if this or that 
should happen, then we are going to be in difficulties . . . 
if he or she should become ill, then we’ll be completely 
isolated, and then if . . .” Enfin, I expect you know the rest, 
at least I presume you know the "Secret Annexers” well 
enough by this time to be able to guess the trend of their 
conversations. 

The reason for all this "if, if” is that Mr. Kraler has been 
called up to go digging. Elli has a streaming cold and will 
probably have to stay at home tomorrow. Miep hasn’t fully 
recovered from her flu yet, and Koophuis has had such bad 

NANNE FRAK 156 

hemorrhage of the stomach that he lost consciousness. What 
a tale of woe! 

The warehouse people are getting a free day tomorrow; 
Elli can stay at home, then the door will remain locked 
and we shall have to be as quiet as mice, so that the neighbors don’t hear us. Henk is coming to visit the deserted ones 
at one o’clock-playing the role of zoo-keeper, as it were. 
For the first time in ages he told us something about the 
great wide world this afternoon. You should have seen the 
eight of us sitting around him; it looked exactly like a picture 
of grandmother telling a story. He talked nineteen to the 
dozen to his grateful audience about food, of course, and 
then Miep’s doctor, and everything that we asked about. 
“Doctor,” he said, “don’t talk to me about the doctor! I rang 
him up this morning, had his assistant on the phone and 
asked for a prescription for flu. The reply was that I could 
come and get the prescription any time between eight and 
nine in the morning. If you have a very bad attack of flu, 
the doctor comes to the telephone himself and says Tut out 
your tongue, say Aah, I can hear all right that your throat is 
inflamed. I’ll write out a prescription for you to order from 
the chemist. Good-by.’ And that’s that.” A fine practice that, 
run by telephone only. 

Rut I don’t want to criticize the doctors; after all, a person 
has but two hands, and in these days there’s an abundance of 
patients and very few doctors to cope with them. Still, we 
couldn’t help laughing when Henk repeated the telephone 
conversation to us. 

I can just imagine what a doctor’s waiting room must look 
like nowadays. One doesn’t look down on panel patients any 
more, but on the people with minor ailments, and thinks: “Hi, 
you, what are you doing here, end of the line, please; urgent 
cases have priority!” 

Yours, Anne 



Thursday , 16 March , 1944 

Dear Kitty, 

The weather is lovely, superb, I can’t describe it; I’m going 
up to the attic in a minute. 

Now I know why I’m so much more restless than Peter. He 
has his own room where he can work, dream, think, and sleep. 
I am shoved about from one corner to another. I hardly spend 
any time in my “double” room and yet it’s something I long 
for so much. That is the reason too why I so frequently escape 
to the attic. There, and with you, I can be myself for a while, 
just a little while. Still, I don’t want to moan about myself, on 
the contrary, I want to be brave. Thank goodness the others 
can’t tell what my inward feelings are, except that I’m growing cooler towards Mummy daily, I’m not so affectionate to 
Daddy and don’t tell Margot a single thing. I’m completely 
closed up. Above all, I must maintain my outward reserve, no 
one must know that war still reigns incessantly within. War 
between desire and common sense. The latter has won up till 
now; yet will the former prove to be the stronger of the two? 
Sometimes I fear that it will and sometimes I long for it to be! 

Oh, it is so terribly difficult never to say anything to Peter, 
but I know that the first to begm must be he; there’s so much 
I want to say and do, I’ve lived it all in my dreams, it is so 
hard to find that yet another day has gone by, and none of it 
comes true! Yes, Kitty, Anne is a crazy child, but I do live in 
crazy times and under still crazier circumstances. 

But, still, the brightest spot of all is that at least I can write 
down my thoughts and feelings, otherwise I would be absolutely stifled! I wonder what Peter thinks about all these 
things? I keep hoping that I can talk about it to him one day. 
There must be something he has guessed about me, because 
he certainly can’t love the outer Anne, which is the one he 
knows so far. 

How can he, who loves peace and quiet, have any liking for 
all my bustle and din? Can he possibly be the first and only 
one to have looked through my concrete armor? And will it 
take him long to get there? Isn’t there an old saying that love 



often springs from pity, or that the two go hand in hand? Is 
that the case with me too? Because I’m often just as sorry for 
him as I am for myself. 

I really don t honestly know how to begin, and however 
would he be able to, when he finds talking so much more difficult than I do? If only I could write to him, then at least I 
would know that he would grasp what I want to say, because 
its so terribly difficult to put it into words! 

Yours, Anne 

Friday , 17 March , 1944 

Dear Kitty, 

A sigh of relief has gone through the "Secret Annexe” Kraler has been exempted from digging by the Court. Elli has 
given her nose a talking to and strictly forbidden it to be a 
nuisance to her today. So everything is all right again, except 
that Margot and I are getting a bit tired of our parents. Don’t 
misunderstand me, I can’t get on well with Mummy at the 
moment, as you know. I still love Daddy just as much, and 
Margot loves Daddy and Mummy, but when you are as old as 
we are, you do want to decide just a few things for yourself, 
you want to be independent sometimes. 

If I go upstairs, then I’m asked what I’m going to do, I’m 
not allowed salt with my food, every evening regularly at a 
quarter past eight Mummy asks whether I ought not to start 
undressing, every book I read must be inspected. I must admit 
that they are not at all strict, and I’m allowed to read nearly 
everything, and yet we are both sick of all the remarks plus 
all the questioning that go on the whole day long. 

Something else, especially about me, that doesn’t please 
them: I don’t feel like giving lots of kisses any more and I 
think fancy nicknames are terribly affected. In short, I’d really 
like to be rid of them for a while. Margot said last evening, "I 
think it’s awfully annoying, the way they ask if you’ve got a 
headache, or whether you don’t feel well, if you happen to 
give a sigh and put your hand to your head!” 



It is a great blow to us both, suddenly to realize how little 
remains of the confidence and harmony that we used to have 
at home. And it’s largely due to the fact that were all “skewwiff” here. By this I mean that we are treated as children over 
outward things, and we are much older than most girls of our 
age inwardly. 

Although I’m only fourteen, I know quite well what I want, 
I know who is right and who is wrong, I have my opinions, 
my own ideas and principles, and although it may sound 
pretty mad from an adolescent, I feel more of a person than a 
child, I feel quite independent of anyone. 

I know that I can discuss things and argue better than 
Mummy, I know I’m not so prejudiced, I don’t exaggerate so 
much, I am more precise and adroit and because of this— you 
may laugh-I feel superior to her over a great many things. If 
I love anyone, above all I must have admiration for them, admiration and respect. Everything would be all right if only I 
had Peter, for I do admire him in many ways. He is such a 
nice, good-looking boy! 

Yours, Anne 

Sunday , 19 March , 1944 

Dear Kitty, 

Yesterday was a great day for me. I had decided to talk 
things out with Peter. Just as we were going to sit down to 
supper I whispered to him, “Are you going to do shorthand 
this evening, Peter?” “No,” was his reply. “Then I’d just like 
to talk to you later!” He agreed. After the dishes were done, I 
stood by the window in his parents’ room awhile for the look 
of things, but it wasn’t long before I went to Peter. He was 
standing on the left side of the open window, I went and stood 
on the right side, and we talked. It was much easier to talk 
beside the open window in semidarkness than in bright light, 
and I believe Peter felt the same. 

We told each other so much, so very very much, that I cant 
repeat it all, but it was lovely; the most wonderful evening I 



have ever had in the "Secret Annexe/’ I will just tell you briefly the various things we talked about. First we talked about 
the quarrels and how I regard them quite differently now, and 
then about the estrangement between us and our parents. 

I told Peter about Mummy and Daddy, and Margot, and 
about myself. 

At one moment he asked, "I suppose you always give each 
other a good night kiss, don’t you?” 

“One, dozens, why, don’t you?” 

“No, I have hardly ever kissed anyone.” 

“Not even on your birthday?” 

“Yes, I have then.” 

We talked about how we neither of us confide in our parents, and how his parents would have loved to have his confidence, but that he didn’t wish it. How I cry my heart out in 
bed, and he goes up into the loft and swears. How Margot and 
I really only know each other well for a little while, but that, 
even so, we don’t tell each other everything, because we are 
always together. Over every imaginable thing— oh, he was just 
as I thought! 

Then we talked about 1942, how different we were then. 
We just don’t recognize ourselves as the same people any 
more. How we simply couldn’t bear each other in the beginning. He thought I was much too talkative and unruly, and I 
soon came to the conclusion that I’d no time for him. I couldn’t 
understand why he didn’t flirt with me, but now I’m glad. He 
also mentioned how much he isolated himself from us all. I 
said that there was not much difference between my noise and 
his silence. That I love peace and quiet too, and have nothing 
for myself alone, except my diary. How glad he is that my 
parents have children here, and that I’m glad he is here. That 
I understand his reserve now and his relationship with his 
parents, and how I would love to be able to help him. 

“You always do help me,” he said. “How?” I asked, very 
surprised. “By your cheerfulness.” That was certainly the 
loveliest thing he said. It was wonderful, he must have grown 
to love me as a friend, and that is enough for the time being. 

the diary of a young girl xei 

I am so grateful and happy, I just can't find the words. I must 
apologize, Kitty, that my style is not up to standard today. 

I have just written down what came into my head. I have 
the feeling now that Peter and I share a secret. If he looks at 
me with those eyes that laugh and wink, then it's just as if a 
little light goes on inside me, I hope it will remain like this 
and that we may have many, many more glorious times together! 

Your grateful, happy Anne 

Monday , 20 March , 1944 

Dear Kitty, 

This morning Peter asked me if I would come again one 
evening, and said that I really didn’t disturb him, and if 
there’s room for one there’s room for two. I said that I couldn’t 
come every evening, because they wouldn’t like it downstairs, 
hut he thought that I needn’t let that bother me. Then I said 
that I would love to come one Saturday evening and especially asked him to warn me when there was a moon. “Then we’ll 
go downstairs,” he answered, “and look at the moon from 
there.” 

In the meantime a little shadow has fallen on my happiness. 
I’ve thought for a long time that Margot liked Peter quite a 
lot too. How much she loves him I don’t know, hut I think it’s 
wretched. I must cause her terrible pain each time Im with 
Peter, and the funny part of it is that she hardly shows it. 

I know quite well that I’d be desperately jealous, but 
Margot only says that I needn’t pity her. 

“I think it’s so rotten that you should be the odd one out,” 
I added. “I’m used to that,” she answered, somewhat bitterly. 

I don’t dare tell Peter this yet, perhaps later on, but we’ve 
got to talk about so many other things first. 

I had a little ticking off. yesterday evening from Mummy, 
which I certainly deserved. I mustn’t overdo my indifference 
towards her. So in spite of everything, I must try once again 
to be friendly and keep my observations to myself. 



Even Pim is different lately. He is trying not to treat me 
as such a child, and it makes him much too cool. See what 
comes of it! 

Enough for now, I’m full to the brim with Peter and can 
do nothing but look at him! 

Evidence of Margot’s goodness: I received this today, 

March 20th , 1944 

Anne, when 1 said yesterday that 1 was not jealous of you 1 was 
only fifty per cent honest. It is like this ; Ym jealous of neither you 
nor Peter. I only feel a bit sorry that 1 haven’t found anyone yet, 
and am not likely to for the time being, with whom I can discuss 
my thoughts and feelings. But 1 should not grudge it to you for 
that reason. One misses enough here anyway, things that other people just take for granted. 

On the other hand, 1 know for certain that 1 would never have 
got so far with Peter, anyway, because 1 have the feeling that if 1 
wished to discuss a lot with anyone, l should want to be on rather 
intimate terms with him. I would want to have the feeling that he 
understood me through and through without my having to say 
much. But for that reason it would have to be someone whom 1 
felt was my superior intellectually, and that is not the case with 
Peter. But 1 can imagine it being so with you and Peter. 

You are not doing me out of anything which is my due; do not 
reproach yourself in the least on my account. You and Peter can 
only gain by the friendship. 

My reply: 

Dear Margot, 

I thought your letter was exceptionally sweet, but I still don’t 
feel quite happy about it and nor do I think that I shall. 

At present there is no question of such confidence as you have in 
mind between Peter and myself, but in the twilight beside an open 
window you can say more to each other than in brilliant sunshine. 
Also it’s easier to whisper your feelings than to trumpet them forth 
out loud. I believe that you are beginning to feel a kind of sisterly 
affection for Peter, and that you would love to help him, just as 
much as 1. Perhaps you will still be able to do that sometime, although that is not the kind of confidence we have in mind. I think 
it must come from both sides, and 1 believe that’s the reason why 
Daddy and I have never got so far. 

Let’s not talk about it any more, but if you still want anything 



please write to me about it, because 1 can say what 1 mean muck 
better on paper. 

You don't know how much I admire you, and I only hope that I 
may yet acquire some of the goodness that you and Daddy have , 
because now 1 don't see much difference between you and Daddy 
in that sense. 

Yours, Anne 

Wednesday, 22 March , 1944 

Dear Kitty, 

I received this from Margot last evening: 

Dear Anne, 

After your letter yesterday l have the unpleasant feeling that you 
will have piickings of conscience when you visit Peter; but really 
there is no reason for this. In my heart of hearts I feel that I have 
the right to share mutual confidence with someone , but 1 could not 
bear Peter in that role yet. 

However , I do feel just as you say, that Peter is a bit like a 
brother, but— a younger brother; we have put out feelers towards 
each other, the affection of a brother and sister might grow if they 
touched, perhaps they will later— perhaps never, however, it has 
certainly not reached that stage yet. 

Therefore you really needn't pity me Now that you've found 
companionship , enjoy it as much as you can. 

In the meantime it is getting more and more wonderful 
here. I believe, Kitty, that we may have a real great love in 
the “Secret Annexe.” Don't worry, I’m not thinking of marrying him. I don’t know what he will be like when he grows up, 
nor do I know whether we should ever love each other enough 
to marry. I know now that Peter loves me, but just how I myself don’t know yet. 

Whether he only wants a great friend, or whether I attract 
him as a girl or as a sister, I can’t yet discover. 

When he said that I always helped him over his parents’ 
quarrels, I was awfully glad; it was one step towards making 
me believe in his friendship. I asked him yesterday what he 
would do if there were a dozen Annes here who always kept 



coming to him. His reply was, “If they were all like you, it certainly wouldn’t be too bad!” He’s tremendously hospitable towards me and I really believe he likes to see me. Meanwhile 
he is working diligently at his French, even when he's m bed, 
going on until a quarter past ten. Oh, when I think about 
Saturday evening and recall it all, word for word, then for the 
first time I don’t feel discontented about myself; I mean that I 
would still say exactly the same and wouldn’t wish to change 
anything, as is usually the case. 

He is so handsome, both when he laughs and when he looks 
quietly in front of him; he is such a darling and so good. I believe what surprised him most about me was when he discovered that I’m not a bit the superficial worldly Anne that I 
appear, but just as dreamy a specimen, with just as many difficulties as he himself. 

Yours, Anne 

Reply; 

Dear Margot, 

1 think the best thing we can do is simply to wait and see what 
happens. It cant be very long before Peter and I come to a definite 
decision , either to go on as before or he different. Just which way 
it will go I dont know myself , and 1 dont bother to look beyond 
my own nose . But I shall certainly do one thing, if Peter and I decide to be friends, 1 shall tell him that you are very fond of him too 
and would always be prepared to help him should the need arise. 
The latter may not be what you wish, but I dont care now, 1 dont 
know what Peter thinks about you, but 1 shall ask him then. 

Tm sure it's not bad-ihe oppositel You are always welcome to 
join us in the attic, or wherever we are, you honestly wont disturb 
us because 1 feel we have a silent agreement to talk only in the 
evenings when ifs dark. 

Keep your courage up f Like 1 do. Although ifs not always easy; 
your time may come sooner than you think. 

Yours, Anne 

1 65 

Thursday , 23 March , 1944 

Dear Kitty, 

Things are running more or less normally again now. 
Our coupon men are out of prison again, thank goodness! 

Miep returned yesterday. EJli is better, although she still 
has a cough; Koophuis will have to stay at home for a long 
time still. 

A plane crashed near here yesterday; the occupants were 
able to jump out in time by parachute. The machine crashed 
onto a school, but there were no children there at the time. 
The result was a small fire and two people killed. The Germans shot at the airmen terribly as they were coming down. 
The Amsterdammers who saw it nearly exploded with rage 
and indignation at the cowardliness of such a deed. We— Im 
speaking of the ladies— nearly jumped out of our skins, I loathe 
the blasted shooting. 

I often go upstairs after supper nowadays and take a breath 
of the fresh evening air. I like it up there, sitting on a chair 
beside him and looking outside. 

Van Daan and Dussel make very feeble remarks when I 
disappear into his room; "Anne’s second home,” they call it, or 
“Is it suitable for young gentlemen to receive young girls in 
semidarkness?” Peter shows amazing wit in his replies to these 
so-called humorous sallies. For that matter, Mummy too is 
somewhat curious and would love to ask what we talk about, 
if she wasn’t secretly afraid of being snubbed. Peter says it’s 
nothing but envy on the part of the grownups, because we are 
young and we don’t pay much attention to their spitefulness. 
Sometimes he comes and gets me from downstairs, but he 
turns simply scarlet in spite of all precautions, and can hardly 
get the words out of his mouth. How thankful I am that I 
don’t blush, it must be a highly unpleasant sensation. Daddy 
always says Im prudish and vain but that’s not true, I’m just 
simply vain! I have not often had anyone tell me I was pretty. 
Except a boy at school, who said I looked so attractive when I 
laughed. Yesterday I received a genuine compliment from 

 

Peter, and fust for fun I will tell you roughly how the conversation went: 

Peter so often used to say, “Do laugh, Anne!” This struck 
me as odd, and I asked, “Why must I always laugh?” 

“Because I like it; you get such dimples in your cheeks 
when you laugh; how do they come, actually?” 

“I was bom with them. I’ve got one in my chin too. That’s 
my only beauty!” 

“Of course not, that’s not true.” 

“Yes, it is, I know quite well that I’m not a beauty; I never 
have been and never shall be.” 

“I don’t agree at all, I think you’re pretty.” 

“That’s not true.” 

“If I say so, then you can take it from me it is!” 

Then I naturally said the same of him. 

I hear a lot from all sides about the sudden friendship. We 
don’t take much notice of all this parental chatter, their remarks are so feeble. Have the two sets of parents forgotten 
their own youth? It seems like it, at least they seem to take us 
seriously, if we make a joke, and laugh at us when we are serious. 

Yours, Anne 

Monday , 27 March , 1944 

Dear Kitty, 

One very big chapter of our history in hiding should really 
be about politics, but as this subject doesn’t interest me personally very much, I’ve rather let it go. So for once I will devote my whole letter to politics today. 

It goes without saying that there are very many different 
opinions on this topic, and it’s even more logical that it should 
be a favorite subject for discussion in such critical times, but— 
it’s just simply stupid that there should be so many quarrels 
over it. 

They may speculate, laugh, abuse, and grumble, let them 
do what they will, as long as they stew in their own juice and 

don't quarrel, because the consequences are usually unpleasant. 

The people from outside bring with them a lot of news that 
is not true; however, up till now our radio set hasn't lied to us. 
Hebk, Miep, Koophuis, Elli, and Kraler all show ups and 
downs in their political moods, Henk least of all 

Political feeling here in the "Secret Annexe” is always about 
the same. During the countless arguments over invasion, air 
raids, speeches, etc., etc., one also always hears the countless 
cries of "impossible,” or “Um Gottes WiUen , if they are going 
to start now however long is it going to last?” "It's going splendidly, first class, good!” Optimists and pessimists, and, above 
all, don’t let’s forget the realists who give their opinions with 
untiring energy and, just as with everything else, each one 
thinking he is right. It annoys a certain lady that her spouse 
has such unparalleled faith in the British, and a certain gentleman attacks his lady because of her teasing and disparaging 
remarks about his beloved nation. 

They never seem to tire of it, I have discovered something 
-the effects are stupendous, just like pricking someone with 
a pin and waiting to see how they jump. This is what I do: 
begin on politics. One question, one word, one sentence, and 
at once they're off! 

Just as if the German Wehrmacht news bulletins and the 
English B.B.C. were not enough, they have now introduced 
“Special Air-Raid Announcements.” In one word, magnificent; 
but on the other hand often disappointing too. The British are 
making a non-stop business of their air attacks, with the same 
zest as the Germans make a business of lying. The radio therefore goes on early in the morning and is listened to at all hours 
of the day, until nine, ten, and often eleven o'clock in the evening. 

This is certainly a sign that the grownups have infinite patience, but it also means the power of absorption of their 
brains is pretty limited, with exceptions, of course— I don't 
want to hurt anyone's feelings. One or two news bulletins 
would be ample per day! But the old geese, well— I've said 
my piece! 



Arbeiter-Programm, Radio “Oranje,” Frank Phillips or Her 
Majesty Queen Wilheknina, they each get their turn, and an 
ever attentive ear. And if they are not eating or sleeping, then 
they re sitting around the radio and discussing food, sleep, 
and politics. 

Ugh! It gets so boring, and it’s quite a job not to become 
a dull old stick oneself. Politics can't do much more harm to 
the parents! 

I must mention one shining exception-a speech by our beloved Winston Churchill is quite perfect. 

Nine o'clock on Sunday evening. The teapot stands, with 
the cozy over it, on the table, and the guests come in. Dussel 
next to the radio on the left, Mr. Van Daan in front of it, with 
Peter beside him. Mummy next to Mr. Van Daan and Mrs. Van 
Daan behind him, and Pirn at the table, Margot and I beside. 
I see I haven't described very clearly how we sit. The gentlemen puff away at their pipes, Peter’s eyes are popping out of 
his head with the strain of listening. Mummy wearing a long 
dark negligee, and Mrs. Van Daan trembling because of the 
planes, which take no notice of the speech but fly blithely on 
towards Essen, Daddy sipping tea, Margot and I united in a 
sisterly fashion by the sleeping Mouschi, who is monopolizing 
both our knees. Margot’s hair is in curlers, I am wearing a 
nightdress, which is much too small, too narrow, and too 
short. 

It all looks so intimate, snug, peaceful, and this time it is 
too, yet I await the consequences with horror. They can hardly wait till the end of the speech, stamping their feet, so impatient are they to get down to discussing it. Brr, brr, brrthey egg each other on until the arguments lead to discord 
and quarrels. 

Yours, Anne