Tuesday , 28 March, 1944

Dearest Kitty, 

I could write a lot more about politics, but I have heaps of 



other things to tell you today. First, Mummy has more or less 
forbidden me to go upstairs so often, because, according to 
her, Mrs. Van Daan is jealous. Secondly, Peter has invited 
Margot to join us upstairs; I don't know whether it's just out 
of politeness or whether he really means it. Thirdly, I went 
and asked Daddy if he thought I need pay any regard to Mrs. 
Van Daan's jealousy, and he didn’t think so. What next? Mummy is cross, perhaps jealous too. Daddy doesn't grudge us 
these times together, and thinks it’s nice that we get on so 
well. Margot is fond of Peter too, but feels that two’s company 
and three’s a crowd. 

Mummy thinks that Peter is in love with me; quite frankly, 
I only wish he were, then we’d be quits and really be able to 
get to know each other. She also says that he keeps on looking 
at me. Now, I suppose that’s true, but still I can’t help it if 
he looks at my dimples and we wink at each other occasionally, can I? 

I’m in a very difficult position. Mummy is against me and 
I’m against her, Daddy closes his eyes and tries not to see the 
silent battle between us. Mummy is sad, because she does 
really love me, while I’m not in the least bit sad, because I 
don’t think she understands. And Peter-I don't want to give 
Peter up, he’s such a darling. I admire him so; it can grow into 
something beautiful between us; why do the “old ’uns” have 
to poke their noses in all the time? Luckily I'm quite used to 
hiding my feelings and I manage extremely well not to let 
them see how mad I am about him. Will he ever say anything? 
Will I ever feel his cheek against mine, like I felt Petel’s cheek 
in my dream? Oh, Peter and Petel, you are one and the samel 
They don’t understand us; won’t they ever grasp that we are 
happy, just sitting together and not saying a word. They don't 
understand what has driven us together like this. Oh, when 
will all these difficulties be overcome? And yet it is good to 
overcome them, because then the end will be all the more 
wonderful. When he lies with his head on his arm with his 
eyes closed, then he is still a child; when he plays with Boche, 
he is loving; when he carries potatoes or anything heavy, then 
he is strong; when he goes and watches the shooting, or looks 



for burglars in the darkness, then he is brave; and when he is 
so awkward and clumsy, then he is just a pet. 

I like it much better if he explains something to me than 
when I have to teach him; I would really adore him to be my 
superior in almost everything. 

What do we care about the two mothers? Oh, but if only he 
would speak! 

Yours, Anne