Friday , 23 June, 1944

Dear Kitty, 

Nothing special going on here. The English have begun 
their big attack on Cherbourg; according to Pirn and Van 
Daan, were sure to be free by October 10. The Russians are 
taking part in the campaign, and yesterday began their offensive near Vitebsk; it’s exactly three years to a day since the 
Germans attacked. We’ve hardly got any potatoes; from now 
on we’re going to count them out for each person, then everyone knows what he’s getting. 

Yours, Anne 



Tuesday , 27 June , 1944 

Dearest Kitty, 

The mood has changed, everything's going wonderfully. 
Cherbourg, Vitebsk, and Sloben fell today. Lots of prisoners 
and booty. Now the English can land what they want now 
they’ve got a harbor, the whole Cotentin Peninsular three 
weeks after the English invasion! A tremendous achievement! 
In the three weeks since D-day not a day has gone by without 
rain and gales, both here and in France, but a bit of bad luck 
didn’t prevent the English and Americans from showing their 
enormous strength, and how! Certainly the “wonder weapon” 
is in full swmg, but of what consequence are a few squibs 
apart from a bit of damage in England and pages full of it in 
the Boche newspapers? For that matter, when they really 
realize m “Bocheland” that the Bolshevists really are on the 
way, they’ll get even more jittery. 

All German women not in military service are being evacuated to Groningen, Friesland, and Gelderland with their children. MusserP has announced that if they get as far as here 
with the invasion he’ll put on a uniform. Does the old fatty 
want to do some fighting? He could have done so in Russia 
before now. Some time ago Finland turned down a peace 
offer, now the negotiations have just been broken off again, 
they’ll be sorry for it later, the silly fools! 

How far do you think we’ll be on July 27? 

Yours, Anne 
Friday , SO June , 1944 

Dear Kitty, 

Bad weather, or bad weather at a stretch to the thirtieth of 
June. 6 Isn’t that well said! Oh yes, I have a smattering of English already; just to show that I can, I’m reading An Ideal 
Husband with the aid of a dictionary. War going wonderfully! 
Bobroisk, Mogilef, and Orsa have fallen, lots of prisoners. 

x Mussert was the Dutch National Socialist leader. 

*In English in the original. 



' Everything's all right here and tempers are improving. The 
superoptimists are triumphing. Elli has changed her hair style, 
Miep has the week off. That’s the latest news. 

Yours, Anne