Wednesday, 29 March, 1944

Dear Kitty, 

Bolkestein, an M.P., was speaking on the Dutch News from 
London, and he said that they ought to make a collection of 
diaries and letters after the war. Of course, they all made a 
rush at my diary immediately. Just imagine how interesting it 
would be if I were to publish a romance of the “Secret Annexe.” The title 1 alone would be enough to make people think 
it was a detective story. 

But, seriously, it would seem quite funny ten years after the 
war if we Jews were to tell how we lived and what we ate and 
talked about here. Although I tell you a lot, still, even so, you 
only know very little of our lives. 

How scared the ladies are during the air raids. For instance, 
on Sunday, when 350 British planes dropped half a million 
kilos of bombs on Ijmuiden, how the houses trembled like a 
wisp of grass in the wind, and who knows how many epidemics now rage. You don't know anything about all these things, 
and I would need to keep on writing the whole day if I were 
to tell you everything in detail. People have to line up for 
vegetables and all kinds of other things; doctors are unable to 
visit the sick, because if they turn their backs on their cars for 
a moment, they are stolen; burglaries and thefts abound, so 
much so that you wonder what has taken hold of the Dutch for 
them suddenly to have become such thieves. Little children of 

^•The original title of this diary was Het Achterhms There is no exact translation into English, the nearest being The Secret Annexe 

eight and eleven years break the windows of people's homes 
and steal whatever they can lay their hands on. No one dares 
to leave his house unoccupied for five minutes, because if you 
go, your things go too. Every day there are announcements in 
the newspapers offering rewards for the return of lost property, typewriters, Persian rugs, electric clocks, cloth, etc., etc. 
Electric clocks in the streets are dismantled, public telephones 
are pulled to pieces— down to the last thread. Morale among 
the population cant be good, the weekly rations are not 
enough to last for two days except the coffee substitute. The 
invasion is a long time coming, and the men have to go to 
Germany. The children are ill or undernourished, everyone is 
wearing old clothes and old shoes. A new sole costs 7.50 florins 
in the black market; moreover, hardly any of the shoemakers 
will accept shoe repairs or, if they do, you have to wait 
months, during which time the shoes often disappear. 

There’s one good thing in the midst of it all, which is that 
as the food gets worse and the measures against the people 
more severe, so sabotage against the authorities steadily increases. The people m the food offices, the police, officials, 
they all either work with their fellow citizens and help them 
or they tell tales on them and have them sent to prison. Fortunately, only a small percentage of Dutch people are on the 
wrong side. 

Yours, Anne 

Friday, SI March , 1944 

Dear Kitty, 

Think of it, it’s still pretty cold, but most people have been 
without coal for about a month-pleasant, ehl In general public feeling over the Russian front is optimistic again, because 
that is terrific! You know I don’t write much about politics, 
but I must just tell you where they are now; they are right by 
the Polish border and have reached the Pruth near Rumania. 
They are close to Odessa. Every evening here they expect an 
extra communique from Stalin. 



They fire off so many salvos in Moscow to celebrate their 
victories that the city must rumble and shake just about every 
day-whether they think it's fun to pretend that the war is 
close at hand again or that they know of no other way of expressing their joy, I don’t know! 

Hungary is occupied by German troops. There are still a 
million Jews there, so they too will have had it now. 

The chatter about Peter and me has calmed down a bit 
now. We are very good friends, are together a lot and discuss 
every imaginable subject. It is awfully nice never to have to 
keep a check on myself as I would have to with other boys, 
whenever we get on to precarious ground. We were talking, 
for instance, about blood and via that subject we began talking 
about menstruation. He thinks we women are pretty tough. 
Why on earth? My life here has improved, greatly improved. 
God has not left me alone and will not leave me alone. 

Yours, Anne