Tuesday, 25 April, 1944

Dear Kitty, 

Dussel has not been on speaking terms with Van Daan for 
ten days and just because, ever since the burglary, a whole lot 
of fresh security measures have been made that don’t suit 
him. He maintains that Van Daan has been shouting at him. 

“Everything here happens upside down,” he told me. “I 

am going to speak to your father about it.” He is not supposed to sit in the office downstairs on Saturday afternoons 
and Sundays any more, but he goes on doing it just the same. 
Van Daan was furious and Father went downstairs to talk to 
him. Naturally, he kept on inventing excuses, but this time he 
could not get around even Father. Father now talks to him 
as little as possible, as Dussel has insulted him. None of us 
know in what way, but it must have been very bad. 

I have written a lovely story called “Blurr, the Explorer ” 
which pleased the three to whom I read it very much. 

Yours, Anne 

Thursday , 27 April , 1944 

Dear Kitty, 

Mrs. Van Daan was in such a bad mood this morning, 
nothing but complaints! First, there’s her cold, and she cant 
get any lozenges, and so much nose-blowing is unendurable. 
Next, it’s that the sun’s not shining, that the invasion doesn’t 
come, that we can t look out of the windows, etc., etc. We all 
had to laugh at her; and she was sporting enough to join in. 
At the moment I’m reading The Emperor Charles V, written 
by a professor at Gottingen University; he worked at the book 
for forty years. I read fifty pages in five days; it’s impossible 
to do more. The book has 598 pages, so now you can work 
out how long it will take me-and there is a second volume to 
follow. But very interesting. 

What doesn’t a schoolgirl get to know in a single dayl Take 
me, for example. First, I translated a piece from Dutch into 
English, about Nelson’s last battle. After that, I went through 
some more of Peter the Great’s war against Norway (17001721), Charles XII, Augustus the Strong, Stanislavs Leczinsky, Mazeppa, Von Gorz, Brandenburg, Pomerania and Denmark, plus the usual dates. 

After that I landed up in Brazil, read about Bahia tobacco, 
the abundance of coffee and the one and a half million in


habitants of Rio de Janeiro, of Pernambuco and Sao Paulo, 
not forgetting the river Amazon; about Negroes, Mulattos, 
Mestizos, Whites, more than fifty per cent of the population 
being illiterate, and the malaria. As there was still some time 
left, I quickly ran through a family tree. Jan the Elder, 
Willem Lodewijk, Ernst Casimir I, Hendrik Casimir I, right 
up to the little Margriet Franciska (bora in 1943 in Ottawa). 

Twelve o’clock: In the attic, I continued my program with 
the history of the Church-Phew! Till one o’clock. 

Just after two, the poor child sat working (Tim, ’Em!) 
again, this time studying narrow- and broad-nosed monkeys. 
Kitty, tell me quickly how many toes a hippopotamus has! ! 
Then followed the Bible, Noah and the Ark, Shem, Ham, 
and Japheth. After that Charles V. Then with Peter: The 
Colonel, in English by Thackeray. Heard my French verbs 
and then compared the Mississippi with the Missouri. 

I’ve still got a cold and have given it to Margot as well as 
to Mummy and Daddy. As long as Peter doesn’t get it! He 
called me his “Eldorado” and wanted a kiss. Of course, I 
couldn’t! Funny boy! But still, he’s a darling. 

Enough for today, good-by! 

Yours, Anne 

Friday , 28 April , 1944 

Dear Kitty, 

I have never forgotten my dream about Peter Wessel (see 
beginning of January). If I think of it, I can still feel his 
cheek against mine now, and recall that lovely feeling that 
made everything good. 

Sometimes I have had the same feeling here with Peter, but 
never to such an extent, until yesterday, when we were, as 
usual, sitting on the divan, our arms around each other’s 
waists. Then suddenly the ordinary Anne slipped away and 
a second Anne took her place, a second Anne who is not reckless and jocular, but one who just wants to love and be gentle. 

I sat pressed closely against him and felt a wave of emotion 

come over me, tears sprang into my eyes, the left one trickled 
onto his dungarees, the right one ran down my nose and also 
fell onto his dungarees. Did he notice? He made no move or 
sign to show that he did. I wonder if he feels the same as I 
do? He hardly said a word. Does he know that he has two 
Annes before him? These questions must remain unanswered. 

At half past eight I stood up and went to the window, 
where we always say good-by. I was still trembling, I was still 
Anne number two. He came towards me, I flung my arms 
around his neck and gave him a kiss on his left cheek, and was 
about to kiss the other cheek, when my lips met his and we 
pressed them together. In a whirl we were clasped in each 
other s arms, again and again, never to leave off. Oh, Peter 
does so need tenderness. For the first time in his life he has 
discovered a girl, has seen for the first time that even the most 
irritating girls have another side to them, that they have 
hearts and can be different when you are alone with them. 
For the first time in his life he has given of himself and, having never had a boy or girl friend in his life before, shown his 
real self. Now we have found each other. For that matter, I 
didn’t know him either, like him having never had a trusted 
friend, and this is what it has come to. . . . 

Once more there is a question which gives me no peace: "Is 
it right? Is it right that I should have yielded so soon, that I 
am so ardent, just as ardent and eager as Peter himself? May 
I, a girl, let myself go to this extent?” There is but one answer: "I have longed so much and for so long-I am so lonely 
—and now I have found consolation.” 

In the mornings we just behave in an ordinary way, in the 
afternoons more or less so (except just occasionally); but m 
the evenings the suppressed longings of the whole day, the 
happiness and the blissful memories of all the previous occasions come to the surface and we only think of each other. 
Every evening, after the last kiss, I would like to dash away, 
not to look into his eyes any more— away, away, alone in the 
darkness. 

And what do I have to face, when I reach the bottom of 
the staircase? Bright lights, questions, and laughter; I have to 



swallow it all and not show a thing. My heart still feels too 
much; I can t get over a shock such as I received yesterday all 
at once. The Anne who is gentle shows herself too little anyway and, therefore, will not allow herself to be suddenly 
driven into the background. Peter has touched my emotions 
more deeply than anyone has ever done before— except in my 
dreams. Peter has taken possession of me and turned me inside out; surely it goes without saying that anyone would require a rest and a little while to recover from such an 
upheaval? 

Oh Peter, what have you done to me? What do you want 
of me? Where will this lead us? Oh, now I understand Elli; 
now, now that I am going through this myself, now I understand her doubt; if I were older and he should ask me to 
marry him, what should I answer? Anne, be honest! You 
would not be able to marry him, but yet, it would be hard to 
let him go. Peter hasn’t enough character yet, not enough 
will power, too little courage and strength. He is still a child 
in his heart of hearts, he is no older than I am; he is only 
searching for tranquillity and happiness. 

Am I only fourteen? Am I really still a silly little schoolgirl? Am I really so inexperienced about everything? I have 
more experience than most, I have been through things that 
hardly anyone of my age has undergone. I am afraid of myself, I am afraid that in my longing I am giving myself too 
quickly. How, later on, can it ever go right with other boys? 
Oh, it is so difficult, always battling with one’s heart and 
reason; in its own time, each will speak, but do I know for 
certain that I have chosen the right time? 

Yours, Anne