Monday , 22 May, 1944

Dear Kitty, 

On May 20th Daddy lost five bottles of yoghourt on a bet 
with Mrs. Van Daan. The invasion still hasn’t come yet; it’s 
no exaggeration to say that all Amsterdam, all Holland, yes, 
the whole west coast of Europe, right down to Spain, talks 
about the invasion day and night, debates about it, and 
makes bets on it and . . . hopes. 

The suspense is rising to a climax. By no means everyone 
we had regarded as “good” Dutch have stuck to their faith 
in the English; by no means everyone thinks the English bluff 
a masterly piece of strategy, oh no, the people want to see 
deeds at last, great, heroic deeds. Nobody sees beyond his 
own nose, no one thinks that the English are fighting for their 
own land and their own people, everyone thinks that it’s their 
duty to save Holland, as quickly and as well as they can. 

What obligations have the English towards us? How have 
the Dutch earned the generous help that they seem so explicitly to expect? Oh no, the Dutch will have made a big 
mistake, the English, in spite of all their bluff, are certainly 
no more to blame than all the other countries, great and 
small, which are not under occupation. The English really 
won’t offer us their apologies, for even if we do reproach 
them for being asleep during the years when Germany was rearming, we cannot deny that all the other countries, especially 

those bordering Germany, also slept. We shan’t get anywhere 
by following an ostrich policy. England and the whole world 
have seen that only too well now, and that is why, one by 
one, England, no less than the rest, will have to make heavy 
sacrifices. 

No country is going to sacrifice its men for nothing and 
certainly not in the interests of another. England is not going 
to do that either. The invasion, with liberation and freedom, 
will come sometime, but England and America will appoint 
the day, not all the occupied countries put together. 

To our great horror and regret we hear that the attitude 
of a great many people towards us Jews has changed. We 
hear that there is anti-Semitism now in circles that never 
thought of it before. This news has affected us all very, very 
deeply. The cause of this hatred of the Jews is understandable, even human sometimes, but not good. The Christians 
blame the Jews for giving secrets away to the Germans, for 
betraying their helpers and for the fact that, through the Jews 
a great many Christians have gone the way of so many others 
before them, and suffered terrible punishments and a dreadful fate. 

This is all true, but one must always look at these things 
from both sides. Would Christians behave differently in 
our place? The Germans have a means of making people 
talk. Can a person, entirely at their mercy, whether Jew or 
Christian, always remain silent? Everyone knows that is practically impossible. Why, then, should people demand the 
impossible of the Jews? 

It’s being murmured in underground circles that the German Jews who emigrated to Holland and who are now in 
Poland may not be allowed to return here; they once had 
the right of asylum in Holland, but when Hitler has gone 
they will have to go back to Germany again. 

When one hears this one naturally wonders why we are 
carrying on with this long and difficult war. We always hear 
that were all fighting together for freedom, truth, and right! 
Is discord going to show itself while we are still fighting, is 
the Jew once again worth less than another? Oh, it is sad, 



very sad, that once more, for the umpteenth time, the old 
truth is confirmed: “What one Christian does is his own 
responsibility, what one Jew does is thrown back at all 
Jews.” 

Quite honestly, I can't understand that the Dutch, who 
are such a good, honest, upright people, should judge us like 
this, we, the most oppressed, the unhappiest, perhaps the 
most pitiful of all peoples of the whole world. 

I hope one thing only, and that is that this hatred of the 
Jews will be a passing thing, that the Dutch will show what 
they are after all, and that they will never totter and lose 
their sense of right. For anti-Semitism is unjust! 

And if this terrible threat should actually come true, then 
the pitiful little collection of Jews that remain will have to 
leave Holland. We, too, shall have to move on again with 
our little bundles, and leave this beautiful country, which 
offered us such a warm welcome and which now turns its 
back on us. 

I love Holland. I who, having no native country, had hoped 
that it might become my fatherland, and I still hope it 
will! 

Yours, Anne 

Thursday , 25 May , 1944 

Dear Kitty, 

There’s something fresh every day. This morning our vegetable man was picked up for having two Jews in his house. 
It's a great blow to us, not only that those poor Jews are 
balancing on the edge of an abyss, but it's terrible for the 
man himself. 

The world has turned topsy-turvy, respectable people are 
being sent off to concentration camps, prisons, and lonely 
cells, and the dregs that remain govern young and old, rich 
and poor. One person walks into the trap through the black 
market, a second through helping the Jews or other people 
who Ve had to go “underground”; anyone who isn’t a mem

ber of the N.S.B. doesn’t know what may happen to him 
from one day to another. 

This man is a great loss to us too. The girls can’t and aren’t 
allowed to haul along our share of potatoes, so the only 
thing to do is to eat less. I will tell you how we shall do that; 
it’s certainly not going to make things any pleasanter. 
Mummy says we shall cut out breakfast altogether, have 
porridge and bread for lunch, and for supper fried potatoes 
and possibly once or twice per week vegetables or lettuce, 
nothing more. Were going to be hungry, but anything is 
better than being discovered. 

Yours, Anne