Friday , 12 March, 1943

Dear Kitty, 

May I introduce someone to you: Mama Frank, champion 
of youth! Extra butter for the young; the problems of modem youth; Mummy defends youth in everything and after a 
certain amount of squabbling she always gets her way. A bottle of preserved sole has gone bad; gala dinner for Mouschi 
and Boche. You haven’t met Boche yet, although she was here 
before we went into hiding. She is the warehouse and office 
cat and keeps down the rats in the storerooms. Her odd political name requires an explanation. For some time the firm 
had two cats; one for the warehouse and one for the attic, 
Now it occasionally happened that the two cats met; and the 
result was always a terrific fight. The aggressor was always 
the warehouse cat; yet it was always the attic cat who managed to win-just like among nations. So the storehouse cat 
was named the German or “Roche” and the attic cat the English or “Tommy.” Tommy was got rid of later; we are all entertained by Boche when we go downstairs. 

We have eaten so many kidney beans and haricot beans 
that I can’t bear the sight of them any more. The mere thought 

of them makes me feel quite sick. Bread is no longer served 
in the evenings now. Daddy has just said that he doesn't feel 
in a good mood. His eyes look so sad again— poor soul! 

I can t drag myself away from a book called The Knock at 
the Door by Ina Boudier-Bakker. The story of the family is 
exceptionally well written. Apart from that, it is about war, 
writers, the emancipation of women; and quite honestly I'm 
not awfully interested. 

Horrible air raids on Germany. Mr. Van Daan is in a bad 
mood; the cause— cigarette shortage. Discussions over the 
question of whether we should, or should not, use our canned 
vegetables ended in our favor. 

I can t get into a single pair of shoes any more, except ski 
boots, which are not much use about the house. A pair of rush 
sandals costing 6.50 florins lasted me just one week, after 
which they were out of action. Perhaps Miep will scrounge 
something under the counter. I must cut Daddy's hair. Pirn 
maintains that he will never have another barber after the war, 
as I do the job so well. If only I didn't snip his ear so often! 

Yours, Anne