Tuesday , 1 August, 1944

Dear Kitty, 

“Little bundle of contradictions.” That’s how I ended my 
last letter and that’s how I’m going to begin this one. “A little 
bundle of contradictions,” can you tell me exactly what it is? 
What does contradiction mean? Like so many words, it can 
mean two things, contradiction from without and contradiction from within. 

The first is the ordinary “not giving in easily, always knowing best, getting in the last word,” enfin, all the unpleasant 
qualities for which I’m renowned. The second nobody knows 
about, that’s my own secret. 

I’ve already told you before that I have, as it were, a dual 
personality One half embodies my exuberant cheerfulness, 
making fun of everything, my high-spiritedness, and above all, 
the way I take everything light. This includes not taking 
offense at a flirtation, a kiss, an embrace, a dirty joke. This 
side is usually lying in wait and pushes away the other which 
is much better, deeper and purer. You must realize that no 
one knows Anne’s better side and that’s why most people find 
me so insufferable. 

Certainly I’m a giddy clown for one afternoon, but then 
everyone’s had enough of me for another month. Really, it’s 
just the same as a love film is for deep-thinking people, simply 
a diversion, amusing just for once, something which is soon 
forgotten, not bad, but certainly not good. I loathe having to 
tell you this, but why shouldn’t I, if I know it’s true anyway? 


My lighter superficial side will always be too quick for the 
deeper side of me and that’s why it will always win. You can’t 
imagine how often I’ve already tried to push this Anne away, 
to cripple her, to hide her, because after all, she’s only half of 
what’s called Anne: but it doesn’t work and I know, too, why 
it doesn’t work. 

I’m awfully scared that everyone who knows me as I always 
am will discover that I have another side, a finer and better 
side. I’m afraid they’ll laugh at me, think I’m ridiculous and 
sentimental, not take me seriously. I’m used to not being taken 
seriously but it’s only the ‘lighthearted” Anne that’s used to it 
and can bear it; the “deeper” Anne is too frail for it. Sometimes, if I really compel the good Anne to take the stage for a 
quarter of an hour, she simply shrivels up as soon as she has to 
speak, and lets Anne number one take over, and before I realize it, she has disappeared. 

Therefore, the nice Anne is never present in company, has 
not appeared one single time so far, but almost always predominates when were alone. I know exactly how I’d like to 
be, how I am too . . . inside. But, alas, I’m only like that for 
myself. And perhaps that’s why, no, I’m sure it’s the reason 
why I say I’ve got a happy nature within and why other people think I’ve got a happy nature without. I am guided by the 
pure Anne within, but outside I’m nothing but a frolicsome 
little goat who’s broken loose. 

As I’ve already said, I never utter my real feelings about 
anything and that’s how I’ve acquired the name of chaserafter-boys, flirt, know-all, reader of love stories. The cheerful 
Anne laughs about it, gives cheeky answers, shrugs her shoulders indifferently, behaves as if she doesn’t care, but, oh 
dearie me, the quiet Anne’s reactions are just the opposite. If 
I’m to be quite honest, then I must admit that it does hurt me, 
that I try terribly hard to change myself, but that I’m always 
fighting against a more powerful enemy. 

A voice sobs within me: “There you are, that’s what’s become of you: you’re uncharitable, you look supercilious and 
peevish, people dislike you and all because you won’t listen to 
the advice given you by your own better hah.” Oh, I would 

like to listen, but it doesn’t work; if I’m quiet and serious, 
everyone thinks it’s a new comedy and then I have to get out 
of it by turning it mto a joke, not to mention my own family, 
who are sure to think I’m ill, make me swallow pills for headaches and nerves, feel my neck and my head to see whether 
I’m running a temperature, ask if I’m constipated and criticize 
me for being in a bad mood. I can’t keep that up: if I’m 
watched to that extent, I start by getting snappy, then unhappy, and finally I twist my heart round again, so that the 
bad is on the outside and the good is on the inside and keep 
on trying to find a way of becoming what I would so like to 
be, and what I could be, if . . . there weren’t any other people 
living in the world. 

Yours, Anne 

EPILOGUE 

Anne's diary ends here. On August 4, 1944 , the Griine 
Polizei made a raid on the tc Secret Annexe” All the occupants , 
together with Kraler and Koophuis, were arrested and sent to 
German and Dutch concentration camps. 

The “Secret Annexe” was plundered by the Gestapo. 
Among a pile of old books, magazines, and newspapers which 
were left lying on the floor, Miep and Elli found Anne's diary . 
Apart from a eery few passages , which are of little interest to 
the reader, the original text has been printed. 

Of all the occupants of the “Secret Annexe,” Anne's father 
done returned. Kraler and Koophuis, who withstood the hardships of the Dutch camp, were able to go home to their families. 

In March 1945, two months before the liberation of Holland, Anne died in the concentration camp at Bergen-Belsen.