Thursday, 6 April, 1944

Dear Kitty, 

You asked me what my hobbies and interests were, so I 
want to reply. I warn you, however, that there are heaps of 
them, so don’t get a shock! 

First of all: writing, but that hardly counts as a hobby. 

Number two: family trees. I’ve been searching for family 
trees of the French, German, Spanish, English, Austrian, Russian, Norwegian, and Dutch royal families in all the newspapers, books, and pamphlets I can find. I’ve made great 
progress with a lot of them, as, for a long time already, I’ve 
been taking down notes from all the biographies and history 
books that I read; I even copy out many passages of history. 

My third hobby then is history, on which Daddy has already bought me a lot of books. I can hardly wait for the day 
that I shall be able to comb through the books in a public 
library. 

Number four is Greek and Roman mythology. I have various books about this too. 

Other hobbies are film stars and family photos. Mad on 
books and reading. Have a great liking for history of art, poets 
and painters. I may go in for music later on. I have a great 
loathing for algebra, geometry, and figures. 

I enjoy all the other school subjects, but history above all! 

Yours, Anne 

Tuesday, 11 April , 1944 

Dear Kitty, 

My head throbs, I honestly don’t know where to begin. 

On Friday (Good Friday) we played Monopoly, Saturday 
afternoon too. These days passed quickly and uneventfully. 
On Sunday afternoon, on my invitation, Peter came to my 
room at half past four; at a quarter past five we went to the 
front attic, where we remained until six o’clock. There was a 
beautiful Mozart concert on the radio from six o’clock until a 

THE DIARY OF A YOUNG GIRL 177 

quarter past seven. I enjoyed it all very much, but especially 
the “Kleine Nachtmusik.” I can hardly listen in the room because Im always so inwardly stirred when I hear lovely music. 

On Sunday evening Peter and I went to the front attic together and, in order to sit comfortably, we took with us a few 
divan cushions that we were able to lay our hands on. We 
seated ourselves on one packing case. Both the case and the 
cushions were very narrow, so we sat absolutely squashed together, leaning against other cases. Mouschi kept us company 
too, so we weren’t unchaperoned. 

Suddenly, at a quarter to nine, Mr. Van Daan whistled and 
asked if we had one of Dussel’s cushions. We both jumped up 
and went downstairs with cushion, cat, and Van Daan. 

A lot of trouble arose out of this cushion, because Dussel 
was annoyed that we had one of his cushions, one that he used 
as a pillow. He was afraid that there might be fleas in it and 
made a great commotion about his beloved cushion! Peter and 
I put two hard brushes in his bed as a revenge. We had a good 
laugh over this little interlude! 

Our fun didn’t last long. At half past nine Peter knocked 
softly on the door and asked Daddy if he would just help him 
upstairs over a difficult English sentence. “That’s a blind,” I 
said to Margot, “anyone could see through that one!” I was 
right. They were in the act of breaking into the warehouse. 
Daddy, Van Daan, Dussel, and Peter were downstairs in a 
flash. Margot, Mummy, Mrs. Van Daan, and I stayed upstairs 
and waited. 

Four frightened women just have to talk, so talk we did, 
until we heard a bang downstairs. After that all was quiet, the 
clock struck a quarter to ten. The color had vanished from our 
faces, we were still quiet, although we were afraid. Where 
could the men be? What was that bang? Would they be fighting the burglars? Ten o’clock, footsteps on the stairs: Daddy, 
white and nervous, entered, followed by Mr. Van Daan. 
“Lights out, creep upstairs, we expect the police in the house!” 

There was no time to be frightened: the lights went out, I 
quickly grabbed a jacket, and we were upstairs. “What has 
happened? Tell us quickly!” There was no one to tell us, the 



men having disappeared downstairs again. Only at ten past 
ten did they reappear; two kept watch at Peter's open window, the door to the landing was closed, the swinging cupboard shut. We hung a jersey round the night light, and after 
that they told us: 

Peter heard two loud bangs on the landing, ran downstairs, 
and saw there was a large plank out of the left half of the 
door. He dashed upstairs, warned the "Home Guard" of the 
family, and the four of them proceeded downstairs. When 
they entered the warehouse, the burglars were in the act of 
enlarging the hole. Without further thought Van Daan 
shouted: “Police!" 

A few hurried steps outside, and the burglars had fled. In 
order to avoid the hole being noticed by the police, a plank 
was put against it, but a good hard kick from outside sent it 
flying to the ground. The men were perplexed at such impudence, and both Van Daan and Peter felt murder welling 
up within them; Van Daan beat on the ground with a chopper, and all was quiet again. Once more they wanted to put 
the plank in front of the hole. Disturbance! A married couple 
outside shone a torch through the opening, lighting up the 
whole warehouse. “Hell!” muttered one of the men, and now 
they switched over from their role of police to that of burglars. 
The four of them sneaked upstairs, Peter quickly opened the 
doors and windows of the kitchen and private office, flung the 
telephone onto the floor, and finally the four of them landed 
behind the swinging cupboard. 

END OF PART ONE 

The married couple with the torch would probably have 
warned the police: it was Sunday evening, Easter Sunday, no 
one at the office on Easter Monday, so none of us could budge 
until Tuesday morning. Think of it, waiting in such fear for 
two nights and a day! No one had anything to suggest, so we 
simply sat there in pitch-darkness, because Mrs. Van Daan in 

her fright had unintentionally turned the lamp right out; 
talked in whispers, and at every creak one heard “Shi sh!” 

It turned half past ten, eleven, but not a sound; Daddy and 
Van Daan joined us in turns. Then a quarter past eleven, a 
bustle and noise downstairs. Everyone’s breath was audible, 
otherwise no one moved. Footsteps in the house, in the private 
office, kitchen, then ... on our staircase. No one breathed 
audibly now, footsteps on our staircase, then a rattling of the 
swinging cupboard. This moment is indescribable. “Now we 
are lost!” I said, and could see us all being taken away by the 
Gestapo that very night. Twice they rattled at the cupboard, 
then there was nothing, the footsteps withdrew, we were 
saved so far. A shiver seemed to pass from one to another, I 
heard someone’s teeth chattering, no one said a word. 

There was not another sound in the house, but a light was 
burning on our landing, right in front of the cupboard. Could 
that be because it was a secret cupboard? Perhaps the police 
had forgotten the light? Would someone come back to put it 
out? Tongues loosened, there was no one in the house any 
longer, perhaps there was someone on guard outside. 

Next we did three things: we went over again what we supposed had happened, we trembled with fear, and we had to 
go to the lavatory. The buckets were in the attic, so all we had 
was Peter s tin wastepaper basket. Van Daan went first, then 
Daddy, but Mummy was too shy to face it. Daddy brought 
the wastepaper basket into the room, where Margot, Mrs. 
Van Daan, and I gladly made use of it. Finally Mummy decided to do so too. People kept on asking for paper— fortunately I had some in my pocket! 

The tin smelled ghastly, everything went on in a whisper, 
we were tired, it was twelve o’clock. “Lie down on the floor 
then and sleep.” Margot and I were each given a pillow and 
one blanket; Margot lying just near the store cupboard and I 
between the table legs. The smell wasn’t quite so bad when 
one was on the floor, but still Mrs. Van Daan quietly brought 
some chlorine, a tea towel over the pot serving as a second 
expedient. 

Talk, whispers, fear, stink, flatulation, and always someone 



on the pot; then try to go to sleep! However, by half past two 
I was so tired that I knew no more until half past three. I 
awoke when Mrs. Van Daan laid her head on my foot. 

“For heaven s sake, give me something to put on!” I asked. 
I was given something, but don’t ask what— a pair of woolen 
knickers over my pajamas, a red jumper, and a black skirt, 
white oversocks and a pair of sports stockings full of holes. 
Then Mrs. Van Daan sat in the chair and her husband came 
and lay on my feet. I lay thinking till half past three, shivering the whole time, which prevented Van Daan from sleeping. 
I prepared myself for the return of the police, then we’d have 
to say that we were in hiding; they would either be good 
Dutch people, then we’d be saved, or N.S.B.-ers, 1 then we’d 
have to bribe them! 

“In that case, destroy the radio,” sighed Mrs. Van Daan. 
“Yes, in the stove!” replied her husband. “If they find us, then 
let them find the radio as well!” 

‘Then they will find Anne’s diary,” added Daddy. “Bum it 
then,” suggested the most terrified member of the party. This, 
and when the police rattled the cupboard door, were my 
worst moments. “Not my diary; if my diary goes, I go with it!” 
But luckily Daddy didn’t answer, 

There is no object in recounting all the conversations that I 
can still remember; so much was said. I comforted Mrs. Van 
Daan, who was very scared. We talked about escaping and 
bemg questioned by the Gestapo, about ringing up, and being 
brave. 

“We must behave like soldiers, Mrs. Van Daan. If all is up 
now, then let’s go for Queen and Country, for freedom, truth, 
and the right, as they always say on the Dutch News from 
England. The only thing that is really rotten is that we get a 
lot of other people into trouble too.” 

Mr. Van Daan changed places again with his wife after an 
hour, and Daddy came and sat beside me. The men smoked 
non-stop, now and then there was a deep sigh, then someone 
went on the pot and everything began all over again. 

Four o’clock, five o’clock, half past five. Then I went and 

x The Dutch National Socialist Movement. 



sat with Peter by his window and listened, so close together 
that we could feel each other’s bodies quivering; we spoke a 
word or two now and then, and listened attentively. In the 
room next door they took down the blackout. They wanted to 
call up Koophuis at seven o’clock and get him to send someone around. Then they wrote down everything they wanted to 
tell Koophuis over the phone. The risk that the police on 
guard at the door, or in the warehouse, might hear the telephone was very great, but the danger of the police returning 
was even greater. 

The points were these: 

Burglars broken in: police have been in the house, as far as 
the swinging cupboard, but no further. 

Burglars apparently disturbed, forced open the door in the 
warehouse and escaped through the garden. 

Main entrance bolted, Kraler must have used the second 
door when he left. The typewriters and adding machine are 
safe in the black case in the private office. 

Try to warn Henk and fetch the key from EUi, then go and 
look round the office— on the pretext of feeding the cat. 

Everything went according to plan. Koophuis was phoned, 
the typewriters which we had upstairs were put in the case. 
Then we sat around the table again and waited for Henk or 
the police. 

Peter had fallen asleep and Van Daan and I were lying on 
the floor, when we heard loud footsteps downstairs. I got up 
quietly: “That’s Henk.” 

“No, no, it’s the police,” some of the others said. 

Someone knocked at the door, Miep whistled. This was too 
much for Mrs. Van Daan, she turned as white as a sheet and 
sank limply into a chair; had the tension lasted one minute 
longer she would have fainted. 

Our room was a perfect picture when Miep and Henk entered, the table alone would have been worth photographing! 
A copy of Cinema and Theater, covered with jam and a 
remedy for diarrhea, opened at a page of dancing girls, two 
jam pots, two started loaves of bread, a mirror, comb, matches. 



ash, cigarettes, tobacco, ash tray, books, a pair of pants, a 
torch, toilet paper, etc., etc., lay jumbled together in variegated splendor. 

Of course Henk and Miep were greeted with shouts and 
tears. Henk mended the hole in the door with some planks, 
and soon went off again to inform the police of the burglary. 
Miep had also found a letter under the warehouse door from 
the night watchman Slagter, who had noticed the hole and 
warned the police, whom he would also visit 

So we had half an hour to tidy ourselves. I’ve never seen 
such a change take place in half an hour. Margot and I took 
the bedclothes downstairs, went to the W.C., washed, and did 
our teeth and hair. After that I tidied the room a bit and went 
upstairs again. The table there was already cleared, so we ran 
off some water and made coffee and tea, boiled the milk, and 
laid the table for lunch. Daddy and Peter emptied the potties 
and cleaned them with warm water and chlorine. 

At eleven o’clock we sat round the table with Henk, who 
was back by that time, and slowly things began to be more 
normal and cozy again. Henk’s story was as follows: 

Mr. Slagter was asleep, but his wife told Henk that her husband had found the hole in our door when he was doing his 
tour round the canals, and that he had called a policeman, 
who had gone through the building with him. He would be 
coming to see Kraler on Tuesday and would tell him more 
then. At the police station they knew nothing of the burglary 
yet, but the policeman had made a note of it at once and 
would come and look round on Tuesday. On the way back 
Henk happened to meet our greengrocer at the comer, and 
told him that the house had been broken into. “I know that,” 
he said quite coolly. “I was passing last evening with my wife 
and saw the hole in the door. My wife wanted to walk on, but 
I just had a look in with my torch; then the thieves cleared at 
once. To be on the safe side, I didn’t ring up the police, as 
with you I didn’t think it was the thing to do. I don’t know 
anything, but I guess a lot.” 

Henk thanked him and went on. The man obviously guesses 

THE DIARY OF a YOUNG GIRL 183 

that we're here, because he always brings the potatoes during 
the lunch hour. Such a nice man! 

It was one by the time Henk had gone and we'd finished 
doing the dishes. We all went for a sleep. I awoke at a quarter 
to three and saw that Mr. Dussel had already disappeared. 
Quite by chance, and with my sleepy eyes, I ran into Peter in 
lie bathroom; he had just come down. We arranged to meet 
downstairs. 

I tidied myself and went down. “Do you still dare to go to 
the front attic?” he asked. I nodded, fetched my pillow, and 
we went up to the attic. It was glorious weather, and soon the 
sirens were wailing; we stayed where we were. Peter put his 
arm around my shoulder, and I put mine around his and so 
we remained, our arms around each other, quietly waiting until Margot came to fetch us for coffee at four o'clock. 

We finished our bread, drank lemonade and joked (we 
were able to again), otherwise everything went normally. In 
the evening I thanked Peter because he was the bravest of us 
aff. 

None of us has ever been in such danger as that night. God 
truly protected us; just think of it— the police at our secret 
cupboard, the light on right in front of it, and still we remained undiscovered. 

If the invasion comes, and bombs with it, then it is each 
man for himself, but in this case the fear was also for our good, 
innocent protectors. “We are saved, go on saving us!” That is 
all we can say. 

This affair has brought quite a number of changes with it. 
Mr. Dussel no longer sits downstairs in Kraler’s office in the 
evenings, but in the bathroom instead. Peter goes round the 
house for a checkup at half past eight and half past nine. Peter 
isn't allowed to have his window open at nights any more. No 
one is allowed to pull the plug after half past nine. This evening there's a carpenter coming to make the warehouse doors 
even stronger. 

Now there are debates going on all the time in the “Secret 
Annexe.” Kraler reproached us for our carelessness. Henk, too, 
said that in a case like that we must never go downstairs. We 



have been pointedly reminded that we are in hiding, that we 
are Jews in chains, chained to one spot, without any rights, but 
with a thousand duties. We Jews mustn't show our feelings, 
must be brave and strong, must accept all inconveniences and 
not gr um ble, must do what is within our power and trust in 
God. Sometime this terrible war will be over. Surely the time 
will come when we are people again, and not just Jews. 

Who has inflicted this upon us? Who has made us Jews different from all other people? Who has allowed us to suffer so 
terribly up till now? It is God that has made us as we are, but 
it will be God, too, who will raise us up again. If we bear all 
this suffering and if there are still Jews left, when it is over, 
then Jews, instead of being doomed, will be held up as an example. Who knows, it might even be our religion from which 
the world and all peoples learn good, and for that reason and 
that reason only do we have to suffer now. We can never become just Netherlander, or just English, or representatives 
of any country for that matter, we will always remain Jews, 
but we want to, too. 

Be brave! Let us remain aware of our task and not grumble, 
a solution will come, God has never deserted our people. Right 
through the ages there have been Jews, through all the ages 
they have had to suffer, but it has made them strong too; the 
weak fall, but the strong will remain and never go under! 

During that night I really felt that I had to die, I waited for 
the police, I was prepared, as the soldier is on the battlefield. 
I was eager to lay down my life for the country, but now, now 
Ive been saved again, now my first wish after the war is that I 
may become Dutch! I love the Dutch, I love this country, I 
love the language and want to work here. And even if I have 
to write to the Queen myself, I will not give up until I have 
reached my goal. 

I am becoming still more independent of my parents, young 
as I am, I face life with more courage than Mummy; my feeling for justice is immovable, and truer than hers. I know what 
I want, I have a goal, an opinion, I have a religion and love. 
Let me be myself and then I am satisfied. I know that I’m a 
woman, a woman with inward strength and plenty of courage. 

If God lets me live, I shall attain more than Mummy ever 
has done, I shall not remain insignificant, I shall work in the 
world and for mankind! 

And now I know that first and foremost I shall require courage and cheerfulness! 

Yours, Anne 

Friday , 14 April , 1944 

Dear Kitty, 

The atmosphere here is still extremely strained. Pirn has just 
about reached boiling point. Mrs. Van Daan is in bed with a 
cold and trumpeting away. Mr. Van Daan grows pale without 
his fags, Dussel, who is giving up a lot of his comfort, is full of 
observations, etc., etc. 

There is no doubt that our luck's not in at the moment. The 
lavatory leaks and the washer of the tap has gone, but, thanks 
to our many connections, we shall soon be able to get these 
things put right. 

I am sentimental sometimes, I know that, but there is occasion to be sentimental here at times, when Peter and I are 
sitting somewhere together on a hard, wooden crate in the 
midst of masses of rubbish and dust, our arms around each 
other's shoulders, and very close, he with one of my curls in 
his hand; when the birds sing outside and you see the trees 
changing to green, the sun invites one to be out in the open 
air, when the sky is so blue, then— oh, then, I wish for so 
much! 

One sees nothing but dissatisfied, grumpy faces here, nothing but sighs and suppressed complaints; it really would seem 
as if suddenly we were very badly off here. If the truth is told, 
things are just as bad as you yourself care to make them. 
There's no one here that sets a good example; everyone should 
see that he gets the better of his own moods. Every day you 
hear, "If only it was all over." 

My work, my hope, my love, my courage, all these things 
keep my head above water and keep me from complaining. 



I really believe, Kits, that I'm slightly bats today, and yet I 
don t know why. Everything here is so mixed up, nothings 
connected any more, and sometimes I very much doubt 
whether in the future anyone will be interested in all my tosh. 

“The unbosomings of an ugly duckling” will be the title of 
all this nonsense. My diary really wont be much use to Messrs. 
Bolkestein or Gerbrandy . 1 

Yours, Anne