Sunday , 13 June, 1943

Dear Kitty, 

My birthday poem from Daddy is too good to keep from 
you. As Pim usually writes verses in German, Margot volunteered to translate it. Judge for yourself whether Margot didn’t 
do it brilliantly. After the usual summary of the events of 
the year, this is how it ran: 

Though youngest here , you are no longer small , 

But life is very hard , since one and all 
Aspire to he your teacher , thus and thus: 

“We have experience , take a tip from us? 

“We know because we did it long ago? 

“Elders are always better, you must know? 

At least that’s been the rule since life began! 

Our personal faults are much too small to scan 

This makes it easier to criticize 

The faults of others , which seem double size. 

Please hear with us, your parents, for we try 
To iudge you fairly and with sympathy. 

Correction sometimes take against your will , 

Though it's like swallowing a bitter pill, 

Which must be done if we’re to keep the peace , 

While time goes by till all this suffering cease. 

You read and study nearly all the day. 

Who might have lived in such a different way. 

You’re never bored and bring us all fresh air . 

Your only moan is this: “ What can I wear? 

1 have no knickers , all my clothes are small, 

My vest might be a loincloth, that is all ! 

To put on shoes would mean to cut off toes, 

Oh dear. I’m worried by so many woes? 

There was also a bit about food that Margot could not translate into rhyme, so I shall leave it out. Don’t you think my 
birthday poem is good? I have been thoroughly spoiled in 
other ways and received a lot of lovely things. Among other 
things a fat book on my pet subject-the mythology of Greece 
and Rome. I can’t complain of a shortage of sweets either— 
everyone has broken into their last reserves. As the Benjamin 

of the family in hiding, I am really more honored than I deserve. 

Yours, Anne 

Tuesday , IS June , 1943 

Dear Kitty, 

Lots of things have happened, but I often think that all my 
uninteresting chatter bores you very much and that you are 
glad not to receive too many letters. So I shall give you the 
news in brief. 

Mr. Vossen has not been operated on for his duodenal ulcer. 
When he was on the operating table and they had opened him 
up, the doctors saw that he had cancer, which was far too advanced to operate. So they stitched him up again, kept him in 
bed for three weeks and gave him good food, and finally sent 
him home again. I do pity him terribly and think it is rotten 
that we can t go out, otherwise I should certainly visit him 
frequently to cheer him up. It is a disaster for us that good old 
Vossen won't be able to keep us in touch with all that goes on, 
and all he hears in the warehouse. He was our best helper and 
security adviser; we miss him very much indeed. 

It will be our turn to hand in our radio next month. Koophuis 
has a clandestine baby set at home that he will let us have to 
take the place of our big Phillips. It certainly is a shame to 
have to hand in our lovely set, but in a house where people 
are hiding, one daren't, under any circumstances, take wanton 
risks and so draw the attention of the authorities. We shall 
have the little radio upstairs. On top of hidden Jews, clandestine money and clandestine buying, we can add a clandestine 
radio. Everyone is trying to get hold of an old set and to hand 
that in instead of their “source of courage." It is really true 
that as the news from outside gets worse, so the radio with its 
miraculous voice helps us to keep up our morale and to say 
again, “Chins up, stick it out, better times will come!" 

Yours, Anne 

Sunday , 11 July , 1943 

Dear Kitty, 

To return to the "upbringing” theme for the umpteenth 
time, I must tell you that I really am frying to be helpful, 
friendly, and good, and to do everything I can so that the rain 
of rebukes dies down to a light summer drizzle. It is mighty 
difficult to be on such model behavior with people you can't 
bear, especially when you don’t mean a word of it. But I do 
really see that I get on better by shamming a bit, instead of 
my old habit of telling everyone exactly what I think (although no one ever asked my opinion or attached the slightest 
importance to it) . 

I often lose my cue and simply can’t swallow my rage at 
some injustice, so that for four long weeks we hear nothing 
but an everlasting chatter about the cheekiest and most 
shameless girl on earth. Don’t you think that sometimes I’ve 
cause for complaint? It’s a good thing I’m not a grouser, because then I might get sour and bad-tempered. 

I have decided to let my shorthand go a bit, firstly to give 
me more time for my other subjects and secondly because of 
my eyes. I’m so miserable and wretched as I’ve become very 
shortsighted and ought to have had glasses for a long time already (phew, what an owl I shall look!) but you know, of 
course, in hiding one cannot. Yesterday everyone talked of 
nothing but Anne’s eyes, because Mummy had suggested 
sending me to the oculist with Mrs. Koophuis. I shook in my 
shoes somewhat at this announcement, for it is no small thing 
to do. Go out of doors, imagine it, in the street— doesn’t bear 
thinking about! I was petrified at first, then glad. But it doesn’t 
go as easily as that, because all the people who would have to 
approve such a step could not reach an agreement quickly. All 
the difficulties and risks had first to be carefully weighed, although Miep would have gone with me straight away. 

In the meantime I got out my gray coat from the cupboard, 
but it was so small that it looked as if it belonged to my 
younger sister. 

I am really curious to know what will come of it all, but I 


don t think the plan will come off because the British have 
landed in Sicily now and Daddy is once again hoping for a 
"quick finish.” 

Elli gives Margot and me a lot of office work; it makes us 
both feel quite important and is a great help to her. Anyone 
can file away correspondence and write in the sales book, but 
we take special pains. 

Miep is just like a pack mule, she fetches and carries so 
much. Almost every day she manages to get hold of some 
vegetables for us and brings everything in shopping bags on 
her bicycle. We always long for Saturdays when our books 
come. Just like little children receiving a present. 

Ordinary people simply don’t know what books mean to us, 
shut up here. Reading, learning, and the radio are our amusements. 

Yours, Anne