Friday , 7 January, 1944

Dear Kitty, 

What a silly ass I am! I am quite forgetting that I have 
never told you the history of myself and all my boy friends. 

When I was quite small— I was even still at a kindergarten 
—I became attached to Karel Samson. He had lost his father, 
and he and his mother lived with an aunt. One of Karels 
cousins, Hobby, was a slender, good-looking dark boy, who 
aroused more admiration than the little, humorous fellow, 
Karel. But looks did not count with me and I was very fond of 
Karel for years. 

We used to he together a lot for quite a long time, but for 
the rest, my love was unretumed. 

Then Peter crossed my path, and in my childish way I really fell in love. He liked me very much, too, and we were inseparable for one whole summer. I can still remember us walking hand in hand through the streets together, he in a white 

Grandma Is grandmother on Father’s side. Granny on Mother’s side. 



cotton suit and me in a short summer dress. At the end of the 
summer holidays he went into the first form of the high school 
and I into the sixth form of the lower school. He used to meet 
me from school and, vice versa, I would meet him. Peter was a 
very good-looking boy, tall, handsome, and shm, with an 
earnest, calm, intelligent face. He had dark hair, and wonderful brown eyes, ruddy cheeks, and a pointed nose. I was mad 
about his laugh, above all, when he looked so mischievous and 
naughty! 

I went to the country for the holidays; when I returned, 
Peter had in the meantime moved, and a much older boy lived 
in the same house. He apparently drew Peter’s attention to 
the fact that I was a childish little imp, and Peter gave me up. 
I adored him so that I didn’t want to face the truth. I tried to 
hold on to him until it dawned on me that if I went on running after him I should soon get the name of being boy-mad. 
The years passed. Peter went around with girls of his own age 
and didn’t even think of saying “Hello” to me any more; but I 
couldn’t forget him. 

I went to the Jewish Secondary School. Lots of boys in our 
class were keen on me-I thought it was fun, felt honored, but 
was otherwise quite untouched. Then later on, Harry was 
mad about me, but, as I’ve already told you, I never fell in 
love again. 

There is a saying “Time heals all wounds,” and so it was 
with me. I imagined that I had forgotten Peter and that I 
didn’t like him a bit any more. The memory of him, however, 
lived so strongly in my subconscious mind that I admitted to 
myself sometimes I was jealous of the other girls, and that 
was why I didn’t like him any more. This morning I knew that 
nothing has changed; on the contrary, as I grew older and 
more mature my love grew with me. I can quite understand 
now that Peter thought me childish, and yet it still hurt that 
he had so completely forgotten me. His face was shown so 
clearly to me, and now I know that no one else could remain 
with me hke he does. 

I am completely upset by the dream. When Daddy kissed 
me this morning, I could have cried out: “Oh, if only you were 


Peter!" I think of him all the time and I keep repeating to myself the whole day, “Oh, Petel, darling, darling Petel . . . !” 

Who can help me now? I must live on and pray to God that 
He will let Peter cross my path when I come out of here, and 
that when he reads the love m my eyes he will say, “Oh, Anne, 
if I had only known, I would have come to you long before!" 

I saw my face in the mirror and it looks quite different. My 
eyes look so clear and deep, my cheeks are pink— which they 
haven’t been for weeks-my mouth is much softer; I look as if 
I am happy, and yet there is something so sad in my expression and my smile slips away from my lips as soon as it has 
come. I’m not happy, because I might know that Peter’s 
thoughts are not with me, and yet I still feel his wonderful 
eyes upon me and his cool soft cheek against mine. 

Oh, Petel, Petel, how will I ever free myself of your image? 
Wouldn’t any other in your place be a miserable substitute? 
I love you, and with such a great love that it can’t grow in 
my heart any more but has to leap out into the open and suddenly manifest itself in such a devastating way! 

A week ago, even yesterday, if anyone had asked me, 
“Which of your friends do you consider would be the most 
suitable to marry?" I would have answered, “I don’t know"; 
but now I would cry, “Petel, because I love him with all my 
heart and soul. I give myself completely!” But one thing, he 
may touch my face, but no more. 

Once, when we spoke about sex, Daddy told me that I 
couldn’t possibly understand the longing yet; I always knew 
that I did understand it and now I understand it fully. Nothing is so beloved to me now as he, my Petel. 

Yours, Anne