Saturday , 1 April, 1944

Dear Kitty, 

And yet everything is still so difficult; I expect you can 
guess what I mean, cant you? I am so longing for a kiss, the 
kiss that is so long in coming. I wonder if all the time he still 
regards me as a friend? Am I nothing more? 

You know and I know that I am strong, that I can carry 
most of my burdens alone. I have never been used to sharing 
my troubles with anyone, I have never clung to my mother, 
but now I would so love to lay my head on ‘has” shoulder just 
once and remain still. 

I can’t, I simply can’t ever forget that dream of Peters 
cheek, when it was all, all so good! Wouldn’t he long for it 
too? Is it that he is just too shy to acknowledge his love? Why 
does he want me with him so often? Oh, why doesn’t he 
speak? 

I’d better stop, I must he quiet, I shall remain strong and 
with a bit of patience the other will come too, but-and that is 

the worst of it— it looks just as if Im running after him; I am 
always the one who goes upstairs, he doesn't come to me. 

But that is just because of the rooms, and he is sure to understand the difficulty. 

Oh, yes, and there's more he'll understand. 

Yours, Anne 

Monday , 3 April , 1944 

Dear Kitty, 

Contrary to my usual custom, I will for once write more 
fully about food because it has become a very difficult and 
important matter, not only here in the "Secret Annexe” but in 
the whole of Holland, all Europe, and even beyond. 

In the twenty-one months that wove spent here we have 
been through a good many "food cycles”— you'll understand 
what that means in a minute. When I talk of "food cycles” I 
mean periods in which one has nothing else to eat but one 
particular dish or kind of vegetable. We had nothing but endive for a long time, day in, day out, endive with sand, endive 
without sand, stew with endive, boiled or en casserole; then it 
was spinach, and after that followed kohlrabi, salsify, cucumbers, tomatoes, sauerkraut, etc., etc. 

For instance, it's really disagreeable to eat a lot of sauerkraut for lunch and supper every day, but you do it if you re 
hungry. However, we have the most delightful period of all 
now, because we don't get any fresh vegetables at all. Our 
weekly menu for supper consists of kidney beans, pea soup, 
potatoes with dumplings, potato-chalet and, by the grace of 
God, occasionally turnip tops or rotten carrots, and then the 
kidney beans once again. We eat potatoes at every meal, beginning with breakfast, because of the bread shortage. We 
make our soup from kidney or haricot beans, potatoes, Julienne soup in packets, French beans in packets, kidney beans 
in packets. Everything contains beans, not to mention the 
bread! 

In the evening we always have potatoes with gravy substi


tut© and-thank goodness weve still got it-beetroot salad. I 
must still tell you about the dumplings, which we make out of 
government flour, water, and yeast. They are so sticky and 
tough, they lie like stones in ones stomach— ah, welll 
The great attraction each week is a slice of liver sausage, and 
jam on dry bread. But we're still alive, and quite often we 
even enjoy our poor meals. 

Yours, Anne