Wednesday , 24 June, 1942

Dear Kitty, 

It is boiling hot, we are all positively melting, and in this 
heat I have to walk everywhere. Now I can fully appreciate 
how nice a tram is; but that is a forbidden luxury for Jews— 
shank’s mare is good enough for us. I had to visit the dentist 
in the Jan Luykenstraat in the lunch hour yesterday. It is a 
long way from our school in the Stadstimmertuinen; I nearly 
fell asleep in school that afternoon. Luckily, the dentist’s
assistant was very kind and gave me a drink— she’s a good sort. 

We are allowed on the ferry and that is about all. There is 
a little boat from the Josef Israelskade, the man there took us 
at once when we asked him. It is not the Dutch people's fault 
that we are having such a miserable time. 

I do wish I didn’t have to go to school, as my bicycle was 
stolen in the Easter holidays and Daddy has given Mummy’s 
to a Christian family for safekeeping. But thank goodness, the 
holidays are nearly here, one more week and the agony is over. 
Something amusing happened yesterday, I was passing the 
bicycle sheds when someone called out to me. I looked around 
and there was the nice-looking boy I met on the previous evening,
at my girl friend Eva’s home. He came shyly towards me 
and introduced himself as Harry Goldberg. I was rather surprised
and wondered what he wanted, but I didn’t have to 
wait long. He asked if I would allow him to accompany me 
to school. “As you’re going my way in any case, I will,” I replied
and so we went together. Harry is sixteen and can tell 
all kinds of amusing stones. He was waiting for me again this 
morning and I expect he will from now on. 

Yours, Anne 

Tuesday , SO June, 1942 

Dear Kitty, 

Ive not had a moment to write to you until today. I was 
with friends all day on Thursday. On Friday we had visitors, 
and so it went on until today. Harry and I have got to know 
each other well in a week, and he has told me a lot about his 
life; he came to Holland alone, and is living with his grand* 
parents. His parents are in Belgium. 

Harry had a girl friend called Fanny. I know her too, a very 
soft, dull creature. Now that he has met me, he realized that 
he was just daydreaming in Fanny's presence. I seem to act 
as a stimulant to keep him awake. You see we all have our 
uses, and queer ones too at times! 

Jopie slept here on Saturday night, but she went to Lies on 
Sunday and I was bored stiff. Harry was to have come in the 
evening, but he rang up at 6 p.m. I went to the telephone, he 
said, “Harry Goldberg here, please may I speak to Anne?” 
“Yes, Harry, Anne speaking.” 

“Hullo, Anne, how are you?” 

“Very well, thank you.” 

Tm terribly sorry I can’t come this evening, but I would 
like to just speak to you; is it all right if I come in ten minutes?” 

“Yes, that’s fine, good-by!” 

“Good-by, 111 be with you soon.” 

Receiver down. 

I quickly changed into another frock and smartened up my 
hair a bit. Then I stood nervously at the window watching for 
him. At last I saw him coming. It was a wonder I didn’t dash 
down at once; instead I waited patiently until he rang. Then I 
went down and he positively burst in when I opened the door. 
“Anne, my grandmother thinks you are too young to go out 
regularly with me, and that I should go to the Leurs, but
perhaps you know that I am not going out with Fanny any morel" 

“No, why is that, have you quarreled?" 

“No, not at all. I told Fanny that we didn't get on well together, so it was better for us not to go out together any more, 
but she was always welcome in our home, and I hope I should 
be in hers. You see, I thought Fanny had been going out with 
another boy and treated her accordingly. Rut that was quite 
untrue. And now my uncle says I should apologize to Fanny, 
but of course I didn't want to do that so I finished the whole 
affair. That was just one of the many reasons. My grandmother 
would rather I went with Fanny than you, but I shan't; old 
people have such terribly old-fashioned ideas at times, but I 
just can't fall into line. I need my grandparents, but in a sense 
they need me too. From now on I shall be free on Wednesday 
evenings. Officially I go to wood-carving lessons to please my 
grandparents, in actual fact I go to a meeting of the Zionist 
Movement. I’m not supposed to, because my grandparents are 
very much against the Zionists. I’m by no means a fanatic, but 
I have a leaning that way and find it interesting. But lately it 
has become such a mess there that I'm going to quit, so next 
Wednesday will be my last time. Then I shall be able to see 
you on Wednesday evenings, Saturday afternoon, Sunday
afternoon, and perhaps more." 

“But your grandparents are against it, you can’t do it behind their backs!” 

“Love finds a way.” 

Then we passed the bookshop on the comer, and there 
stood Peter Wessel with two other boys; he said “Hello"— it's 
the first time he has spoken to me for ages, I was really 
pleased. 

Harry and I walked on and on and the end of it all was that 
I should meet him at five minutes to seven m the front of his 
house next evening. 

Yours, Anne 

Friday , S July , 1942 

Dear Kitty, 

Harry visited us yesterday to meet my parents, I had bought 
a cream cake, sweets, tea, and fancy biscuits, quite a spread, 
but neither Harry nor I felt like sitting stiffly side by side
indefinitely, so we went for a walk, and it was already ten past 
eight when he brought me home. Daddy was very cross, and 
thought it was very wrong of me because it is dangerous for 
Jews to be out after eight o’clock, and I had to promise to be 
in by ten to eight in future. 

Tomorrow I’ve been invited to his house. My girl friend 
Jopie teases me the whole time about Harry. I’m honestly not 
in love, oh, no, I can surely have boy friends—no one thinks 
anything of that— but one boy friend, or beau, as Mother calls 
him, seems to be quite different. 

Harry went to see Eva one evening and she told me that 
she asked him, “Who do you like best, Fanny or Anne?” He 
said, “It’s nothing to do with you!” But when he left (they 
hadn’t chatted together any more the whole evening), “Now 
listen, it’s Anne, so long, and don’t tell a soul.” And like a 
flash he was gone. 

It’s easy to see that Harry is in love with me, rather fun for 
a change. Margot would say, “Harry is a decent lad.” I agree, 
but he is more than that. Mummy is full of praise* a goodlooking boy, a well-behaved, nice boy. I’m glad that the whole 
family approve of him. He likes them too, but he thinks my 
girl friends are very childish, and he’s quite right. 

Yours, Anne 

Sunday morning, 5 July, 1942 

Dear Kitty, 

Our examination results were announced in the Jewish 
Theater last Friday. I couldn’t have hoped for better.
My report is not at all bad, I had one weeks satis, a five for algebra, 
two sixes, and the rest were all sevens or eights. They were 
certainly pleased at home, although over the question of 
marks my parents are quite different from most They don't 
care a bit whether my reports are good or bad as long as Im 
well and happy, and not too cheeky: then the rest will come 
by itself. I am just the opposite. I don’t want to be a bad 
pupil; I should really have stayed in the seventh form in the 
Montessori School, but was accepted for the Jewish
Secondary. When all the Jewish children had to go to Jewish schools, 
the headmaster took Lies and me conditionally after a bit of 
persuasion. He relied on us to do our best and I don’t want 
to let him down. My sister Margot has her report too, brilliant 
as usual. She would move up with cum laude if that existed 
at school, she is so brainy. Daddy has been at home a lot 
lately, as there is nothing for him to do at business; it must 
be rotten to feel so superfluous. Mr. Koophuis has taken over 
Travies and Mr. Kraier the firm Kolen & Co. When w© 
walked across our little square together a few days ago, 
Daddy began to talk of us going into hiding. I asked him why 
on earth he was beginning to talk of that already. “Yes, 
Anne,” he said, ‘you know that we have been taking food, 
clothes, furniture to other people for more than a year now. 
We don’t want our belongings to be seized by the Germans, 
but we certainly don’t want to fall into their clutches ourselves. So we shall disappear of our own accord and not wait 
until they come and fetch us.” 

“But, Daddy, when would it be?” He spoke so seriously 
that I grew very anxious. 

“Don’t you worry about it, we shall arrange everything. 
Make the most of your carefree young life while you can.” 
That was all. Oh, may the fulfillment of these somber words 
remain far distant yet! 

Yours, Anne