Wednesday, 16 February, 1944

Dear Kitty, 

It’s Margot’s birthdav. Peter came at half past twelve to 
look at the presents and stayed talking much longer than was 
strictly necessary— a thing he’d have never done otherwise In 
the afternoon I went to get some coffee and, after that, potatoes, because I wanted to spoil Mai got for ]ust that one day m 
the year I went through Peter’s room; he took all his papers 
off the stairs at once and I asked whether I should close the 
trap door to the attic. “Yes,” he replied, “knock when you 
come back, then I’ll open it for you ” 

I thanked him, went upstairs, and searched at least ten minutes in the large barrel for the smallest potatoes Then my 
back began to ache and I got cold Naturally I didn’t knock, 
but opened the trap door myself, but still he came to meet me 
most obligingly, and took the pan from me. 

“I’ve looked for a long time, these are the smallest I could 
find,” I said. 

“Did you look in the big barrel?” 

“Yes, I’ve been over them all.” 

By this time I was standing at the bottom of the stairs and 



he looked searchingly in the pan which he was still holding. 
“Oh, but these are first-rate,” he said, and added when I took 
the pan from him, “I congratulate you!” At the same time he 
gave me such a gentle warm look which made a tender glow 
within me. I could really see that he wanted to please me, and 
because he couldn’t make a long complimentary speech he 
spoke with his eyes. I understood him, oh, so well, and was 
very grateful. It gives me pleasure even now when I recall 
those words and that look he gave me. 

When I went downstairs, Mummy said that I must get some 
more potatoes, this time for supper. I willingly offered to go 
upstairs again. 

When I came into Peter’s room, I apologized at having to 
disturb him again. When I was already on the stairs he got 
up, and went and stood between the door and the wall, firmly 
took hold of my arm, and wanted to hold me back by force. 

Til go,” he said. I rephed that it really wasn’t necessary 
and that I didn’t have to get particularly small ones this time. 
Then he was convinced and let my arm go. On the way down, 
he came and opened the trap door and took the pan again. 
When I reached the door, I asked, “What are you doing?” 
“French,” he replied. I asked if I might glance through the 
exercises, washed my hands, and went and sat on the divan 
opposite him. 

We soon began talking, after I’d explained some of the 
French to him. He told me that he wanted to go to the Dutch 
East Indies and live on a plantation later on. He talked about 
his home life, about the black market, and then he said that 
he felt so useless. I told him that he certainly had a very strong 
inferiority complex. He talked about the Jews. He would have 
found it much easier if he’d been a Christian and if he could 
be one after the war. I asked if he wanted to be baptized, but 
that wasn’t the case either. Who was to know whether he was 
a Jew when the war was over? he said. 

This gave me rather a pang; it seems such a pity that there’s 
always just a tinge of dishonesty about him. For the rest we 
chatted very pleasantly about Daddy, and about judging peo» 


pies characters and all kinds of things, I can’t remember 
exactly what now. 

It was half past four by the time I left. * 

In the evening he said something else that I thought was 
nice. We were talking about a picture of a film star that I’d 
given him once, which has now been hanging in his room for 
at least a year and a half He liked it very much and I offered 
to give him a few more sometime “No,” he replied, “I’d lather 
leave it like this. I look at these every day and they have 
grown to be my fnends.” 

Now I understand more why he always hugs Mouschi. He 
needs some affection, too, of course. 

I’d forgotten something else that he talked about. He said, 
“I don’t know what fear is, except when I think of my own 
shortcomings. But I’m getting over that too ” 

Peter has a terrible inferiority complex. For instance, he 
always thinks that he is so stupid, and we are so clever. If I 
help him with his French, he thanks me a thousand times. 
One day I shall turn around and say “Oh, shut up, you’re 
much better at English and geography!” 

Yours, Anne 

Friday, 18 Fehruaiy , 1944 

Dear Kitty, 

Whenever I go upstairs now I keep on hoping that I shall 
see “him.” Because my life now has an object, and I have 
something to look forward to, everything has become more 
pleasant. 

At least the object of my feelings is always there, and I 
needn’t be afraid of rivals, except Margot Don’t think I’m 
in love, because I’m not, but I do have the feeling all the time 
that something fine can grow up between us, something that 
gives confidence and friendship. If I get half a chance, I go 
up to him now. It’s not like it used to be when he didn't know 
how to begin. It’s just the opposite-he’s still talking when I’m 
half out of the room. 

Mummy doesn’t like it much, and always says I’ll be a 
nuisance and that I must leave him in peace. Honestly, 
doesn’t she realize that I’ve got some intuition? She looks at 
me so queerly every time I go into Peter’s little room. If I 
come downstairs from there, she asks me where I’ve been. I 
simply can’t bear it, and think it’s horrible. 

Yours, Anne