Thursday, 11 May, 1944

Dear Kitty, 

I’m frightfully busy at the moment, and although it sounds 
mad, I haven’t time to get through my pile of work. Shall I 
tell you briefly what I have got to do? Well, then, by tomorrow I must finish reading the first part of Galileo Galilei, 
as it has to be returned to the library. I only started it yesterday, but I shall manage it. 

Next week I have got to read Palestine at the Crossroads 



and the second part of Galilei. Next I finished reading the 
first part of the biography of The Emperor Charles V yesterday, and it’s essential that I work out all the diagrams and 
family trees that I have collected from it. After that I have 
three pages of foreign words gathered from various books, 
which have all got to be recited, written down, and learned. 
Number four is that my film stars are all mixed up together 
and are simply gasping to be tidied up; however, as such a 
clearance would take several days, and since Professor Anne, 
as she’s already said, is choked with work, the chaos will have 
to remain a chaos. 

Next Theseus, Oedipus, Peleus, Orpheus, Jason, and 
Hercules are all awaiting their turn to be arranged, as their 
different deeds lie crisscross in my mind like fancy threads in 
a dress; it’s also high time Myron and Phidias had some treatment, if they wish to remain at all coherent. Likewise it’s the 
same with the seven and nine years’ war; I’m mixing everything up together at this rate. Yes, but what can one do with 
such a memory! Think how forgetful I shall be when I’m 
eighty! 

Oh, something else, the Bible; how long is it still going to 
take before I meet the bathing Susanna? And what do they 
mean by the guilt of Sodom and Gomorrah? Oh, there is still 
such a terrible lot to find out and to learn. And in the meantime I’ve left Lisolette of the Pfalz completely in the lurch. 

Kitty, can you see that I’m just about bursting? 

Now, about something else: you’ve known for a long time 
that my greatest wish is to become a journalist someday and 
later on a famous writer. Whether these leanings towards 
greatness (or insanity?) will ever materialize remains to be 
seen, but I certainly have the subjects in my mind. In any 
case, I want to publish a book entitled Het Achterhuis after 
the war. Whether I shall succeed or not, I cannot say, but 
my diary will be a great help. I have other ideas as well, besides Het Achterhuis. But I will write more fully about them 
some other time, when they have taken a clearer form in my 
mind. 

Yours, Anne 

Saturday , 13 May , 1944 

Dearest Kitty, 

It was Daddy s birthday yesterday. Mummy and Daddy 
have been married nineteen years. The charwoman wasn't 
below and the sun shone as it has never shone before in 1944. 
Our horse chestnut is in full bloom, thickly covered with 
leaves and much more beautiful than last year. 

Daddy received a biography of the life of Linnaeus from 
Koophuis, a book on nature from Kraler, Amsterdam by the 
Water from Dussel, a gigantic box from Van Daan, beautifully done up and almost professionally decorated, containing 
three eggs, a bottle of beer, a bottle of yoghourt, and a green 
tie. It made our pot of syrup seem rather small. My roses 
smelled lovely compared with Miep’s and Ellis carnations, 
which had no smell, but were very pretty too. He was certainly spoiled. Fifty fancy pastries have arrived, heavenly! 
Daddy himself treated us to spiced gingerbread, beer for the 
gentlemen, and yoghourt for the ladies. Enjoyment all around! 

Yours, Anne 

Tuesday , 16 May , 1944 

Dearest Kitty, 

Just for a change, as we haven't talked about them for so 
long, I want to tell you a little discussion that went on between Mr. and Mrs. Van Daan yesterday. 

Mrs. Van Daan: “The Germans are sure to have made the 
Atlantic Wall very strong indeed, they will certainly do all in 
their power to hold back the English. It’s amazing how strong 
the Germans are!” 

Mr. Van Daan: “Oh yes, incredibly.” 

Mrs. Van Daan: “Ye-es.” 

Mr. Van Daan: “The Germans are so strong they're sure 
to win the war in the end, in spite of everything!” 



Mrs. Van Daan: “Its quite possible, Fm not convinced of 
the opposite yet.” 

Mr. Van Daan: “I won t bother to reply any more.” 

Mrs. Van Daan: “Still you always do answer me, you can’t 
resist capping me every time.” 

Mr. Van Daan: “Of course not, but my replies are the bare 
minimum.” 

Mrs Van Daan: “But still you do reply, and you always 
have to be in the right! Your prophecies don’t always come 
true by a long shot.” 

Mr. Van Daan: ‘They have up till now.” 

Mrs. Van Daan: “That’s not true. The invasion was to have 
come last year, and the Firms were to have been out of the 
war by now. Italy was finished in the winter, but the Russians 
would already have Lemberg; oh, no, I don’t think much of 
your prophecies.” 

Mr. Van Daan (standing up): “It’s about time you shut 
your mouth. One day I’ll show you that I’m right; sooner or 
later you’ll get enough of it. I can’t bear any more of your 
grousing. You’re so infuriating but you’ll stew in your own 
juice one day.” 

End of Part I. 

I really couldn’t help laughing. Mummy too, while Peter 
sat biting his lip. Oh, those stupid grownups, they’d do better 
to start learning themselves, before they have so much to say 
to the younger generation! 

Yours, Anne 

Friday , 19 May , 1944 

Dear Kitty, 

I felt rotten yesterday, really out of sorts (unusual for 
Anne!), with tummy-ache and every other imaginable misery. 
Tm much better again today, feel very hungry, but I’d better 
not touch the kidney beans we’re having today. 

All goes well with Peter and me. The poor boy seems to 
need a little love even more than I do. He blushes every eve

THE DIAKY OF A YOUNG GIRL 



ning when he gets his good-night kiss and simply begs for 
another. I wonder if I'm a good substitute for Boche? I don’t 
mind, he is so happy now that he knows that someone loves 
him. 

After my laborious conquest IVe got the situation a bit 
more in hand now, but I don’t think my love has cooled off. 
He’s a darling, but I soon closed up my inner self from him. 
If he wants to force the lock again he’ll have to work a good 
deal harder than before! 

Yours, Anne