Thursday , 6 July, 1944

Dear Kitty, 

It strikes fear to my heart when Peter talks of later being a 
criminal, or of gambling; although it’s meant as a joke, of 
course, it gives me the feeling that he’s afraid of his own 
weakness. Again and again I hear from both Margot and 
Peter: “Yes, if I was as strong and plucky as you are, if I always stuck to what I wanted, if I had such persistent energy, 
yes then ... 1” 

I wonder if it’s really a good quality not to let myself be influenced. Is it really good to follow almost entirely my own 
conscience? 

Quite honestly, I can’t imagine how anyone can say: “I’m 
weak,” and then remain so. After all, if you know it, why not 
fight against it, why not try to train your character? The answer was: “Because it’s so much easier not to!” This reply 
rather discouraged me. Easy? Does that mean that a lazy, 
deceitful life is an easy life? Oh, no, that can’t be true, it 
mustn’t be true, people can so easily be tempted by slackness 
. . . and by money. 

I thought for a long time about the best answer to give 
Peter, how to get him to believe m himself and, above all, to 
try and improve himself; I don’t know whether my line of 
thought is right though, or not. 

I’ve so often thought how lovely it would be to have someone’s complete confidence, but now, now that I’m that far, I 
realize how difficult it is to think what the other person is 
thinking and then to find the right answer. More especially 
because the very ideas of “easy” and “money” are something 
entirely foreign and new to me. Peter’s beginning to lean on 
me a bit and that mustn’t happen under any circumstances. 



A type like Peter finds it difficult to stand on his own feet, but 
it's even harder to stand on your own feet as a conscious, living being. Because if you do, then if s twice as difficult to steer 
a right path through the sea of problems and still remain constant through it all. I’m just drifting around, have been searching for days, searching for a good argument against that terrible word “easy,” something to settle it once and for all. 

How can I make it clear to him that what appears easy and 
attractive will drag him down into the depths, depths where 
there is no comfort to be found, no friends and no beauty, 
depths from which it is almost impossible to raise oneself? 

We all live, but we don’t know the why or the wherefore. 
We all hve with the object of being happy; our lives are all 
different and yet the same. We three have been brought up in 
good circles, we have the chance to learn, the possibility of 
attaining something, we have all reason to hope for much happiness, but ... we must earn it for ourselves. And that is never 
easy. You must work and do good, not be lazy and gamble, if 
you wish to earn happiness. Laziness may appear attractive, 
but work gives satisfaction. 

I can’t understand people who don’t like work, yet that isn’t 
the case with Peter; he just hasn’t got a fixed goal to aim at, 
and he thinks he’s too stupid and too inferior to achieve anything. Poor boy, he’s never known what it feels like to make 
other people happy, and I can’t teach him that either. He has 
no religion, scoffs at Jesus Christ, and swears, using the name 
of God; although I’m not orthodox either, it hurts me every 
time I see how deserted, how scornful, and how poor he really 
is. 

People who have a religion should be glad, for not everyone 
has the gift of believing in heavenly things. You don’t necessarily even have to be afraid of punishment after death; 
purgatory, hell, and heaven are things that a lot of people 
can’t accept, but still a religion, it doesn’t matter which, keeps 
a person on the right path. It isn’t the fear of God but the upholding of one’s own honor and conscience. How noble and 
good everyone could be if, every evening before falling asleep, 
they were to recall to their minds the events of the whole day 



and consider exactly what has been good and bad. Then, without realizing it, you try to improve yourself at the start of each 
new day; of course, you achieve quite a lot in the course of 
time. Anyone can do this, it costs nothing and is certainly very 
helpful. Whoever doesn't know it must learn and find by experience that: "A quiet conscience makes one strong!” 

Yours, Anne 

Saturday , 8 July , 1944 

Dear Kitty, 

The chief representative of the business, Mr. B., has been 
in Beverwijk and managed, just like that, to get strawberries 
at the auction sale . 1 They arrived here dusty, covered with 
sand, but in large quantities. No less then twenty-four trays 
for the office people and us. That very same evening we bottled six jars and made eight pots of jam. The next morning 
Miep wanted to make jam for the office people. 

At half past twelve, no strangers in the house, front door 
bolted, trays fetched, Peter, Daddy, Van Daan clattering on 
the stairs: Anne, get hot water; Margot, bring a bucket; all 
hands on deck! I went into the kitchen, which was chock-full, 
with a queer feeling in my tummy, Miep, Elli, Koophuis, 
Henk, Daddy, Peter: the famihes in hiding and their supply 
column, all mingling together, and in the middle of the day 
too! 

People can't see in from outside because of the net curtains, 
but, even so, the loud voices and banging doors positively 
gave me the jitters. Are we really supposed to be m hiding? 
That's what flashed through my mind, and it gives me a very 
queer feeling to be able to appear in the world again. The 
pan was full, and I dashed upstairs again. The rest of the family was seated round our table in the kitchen busy stalk-picking-at least that's what they were supposed to be doing; more 
went into mouths than into buckets. Another bucket would 

*It is compulsory in Holland for all growers to sell their produce at public 
auction. 



soon be required. Peter went to the downstairs kitchen againthe bell rang twice; the bucket stayed where it was, Peter tore 
upstairs, locked the cupboard door! We were kicking our heels 
impatiently, couldn't turn on a tap, even though the strawberries were only half washed; the rule: "If anyone m the 
house, use no water, because of the noise," was strictly maintained. 

At one o'clock Henk came and told us that it was the postman. Peter hurried downstairs again. Ting-a-ling ... the bell, 
right about turn. I go and listen to see if I can hear anyone 
coming, first at our cupboard door and then creep to the top 
of the stairs. Finally Peter and I both lean over the banisters 
like a couple of thieves, listening to the din downstairs. No 
strange voices, Peter sneaks down, stops halfway, and calls 
out: "Elli!" No answer, one more: "Elli!” Peter's voice is 
drowned by the din in the kitchen. He goes right down and 
into the kitchen. I stand looking down tensely. "Get upstairs at 
once, Peter, the accountant is here, clear out!" It was Koophuis speaking. Peter comes upstairs sighing, the cupboard 
door closes. Finally Kraler arrives at half past one. “Oh, dearie 
me, I see nothing but strawberries, strawberries at breakfast, 
strawberries stewed by Miep, I smell strawberries, must have 
a rest from them and go upstairs— what is being washed up 
here . . . strawberries.” 

The remainder are being bottled. In the evening: two jars 
unsealed. Daddy quickly makes them into jam The next 
morning: two more unsealed and four in the afternoon. Van 
Daan hadn't brought them to the right temperature for sterilizing. Now Daddy makes jam every evening. 

We eat strawberries with our porridge, skimmed milk with 
strawberries, bread and butter with strawberries, strawberries 
for dessert, strawberries with sugar, strawberries with sand. 
For two whole days strawberries and nothing but strawberries, 
then the supply was finished or in bottles and under lock and 
key. 

"I say, Anne,” Margot calls out, "the greengrocer on the 
corner has let us have some green peas, nineteen pounds," 

THE DIARY OF A YOUNG GIRL 229 

“That's nice of him/' I replied. And it certainly is, but oh, the 
work . . . ugh! 

“You've all got to help shelling peas on Saturday morning,” 
Mummy announced when we were at table. And, sure enough, 
the big enamel pan duly appeared this morning, filled to the 
brim. Shelling peas is a boring job, but you ought to try 
“skinning" the pods. I don't think many people realize how 
soft and tasty the pod is when the skin on the inside has been 
removed. However, an even greater advantage is that the 
quantity which can be eaten is about triple the amount of 
when one only eats the peas. It's an exceptionally precise, 
finicky job, pulling out this skin; perhaps it's all right for 
pedantic dentists or precise office workers, but for an impatient teen-ager like me, it’s frightful. We began at half past 
mne, I got up at half past ten, at half past eleven I sat down 
again. This refrain hummed in my ears: bend the top, pull the 
skm, remove the string, throw out the pod, etc., etc., they 
dance before my eyes, green, green, green maggots, strings, 
rotten pods, green, green, green. Just for the sake of doing 
something, I chatter the whole morning, any nonsense that 
comes into my head, make everyone laugh, and bore them 
stiff. But every string that I pull makes me feel more certain 
that I never, never want to be just a housewife only! 

We finally have breakfast at twelve o'clock, but from half 
past twelve until quarter past one we've got to go skinning 
pods again. I’m just about seasick when I stop, the others a 
bit too. I go and sleep till four o’clock, but I'm still upset by 
those wretched peas. 

Yours, Anne 

Saturday , 15 July , 1944 

Dear Kitty, 

We have had a book from the library with the challenging 
title of: What Do You Think of the Modem Young Girl? I 
want to talk about this subject today. 

The author of this book criticizes “the youth of today” from 



top to toe, without, however, condemning the whole of the 
young brigade as "incapable of anything good/’ On the contrary, she is rather of the opinion that if young people wished, 
they have it in their hands to make a bigger, more beautiful 
and better world, but that they occupy themselves with superficial things, without giving a thought to real beauty. 

In some passages, the writer gave me very much the feeling 
she was directing her criticism at me, and that’s why I want 
to lay myself completely bare to you for once and defend myself against this attack. 

I have one outstanding trait in my character, which must 
strike anyone who knows me for any length of time, and that 
is my knowledge of myself. I can watch myself and my actions, just like an outsider. The Anne of every day I can face 
entirely without prejudice, without making excuses for her, 
and watch what’s good and what’s bad about her. This "selfconsciousness” haunts me, and every time I open my mouth I 
know as soon as I’ve spoken whether "that ought to have been 
different” or "that was right as it was.” There are so many 
things about myself that I condemn; I couldn’t begin to name 
them all. I understand more and more how true Daddy’s 
words were when he said: "All children must look after their 
own upbringing.” Parents can only give good advice or put 
them on the right paths, but the final forming of a person’s 
character lies in their own hands. 

In addition to this, I have lots of courage, I always feel so 
strong and as if I can bear a great deal, I feel so free and so 
young! I was glad when I first realized it, because I don’t think 
I shall easily bow down before the blows that inevitably come 
to everyone. 

But I’ve talked about these things so often before. Now I 
want to come to the chapter of "Daddy and Mummy don’t 
understand me.” Daddy and Mummy have always thoroughly 
spoiled me, were sweet to me, defended me, and have done all 
that parents could do. And yet I’ve felt so terribly lonely for a 
long time, so left out, neglected, and misunderstood. Daddy 
tried all he could to check my rebellious spirit, but it was no 

THE DIARY OF A YOUNG GIRL 231 

use, I have cured myself, by seeing for myself what was wrong 
in my behavior and keeping it before my eyes. 

How is it that Daddy was never any support to me in my 
struggle, why did he completely miss the mark when he 
wanted to offer me a helping hand? Daddy tried the wrong 
methods, he always talked to me as a child who was going 
through difficult phases. It sounds crazy, because Daddy’s the 
only one who has always taken me into his confidence, and 
no one but Daddy has given me the feeling that I’m sensible. 
But there’s one thing he’s omitted: you see, he hasn’t realized 
that for me the fight to get on top was more important than all 
else. I didn’t want to hear about “symptoms of your age,” or 
“other girls,” or “it wears off by itself”; I didn’t want to be 
treated as a girl-like-all-others, but as Anne-on-her-own-merits. 
Pirn didn’t understand that. For that matter, I can’t confide in 
anyone, unless they tell me a lot about themselves, and as I 
know very little about Pirn, I don’t feel that I can tread upon 
more intimate ground with him. Pirn always takes up the 
older, fatherly attitude, tells me that he too has had similar 
passing tendencies. But still he’s not able to feel with me like 
a friend, however hard he tries. These things have made me 
never mention my views on life nor my well-considered 
theories to anyone but my diary and, occasionally, to Margot. 
I concealed from Daddy everything that perturbed me; I 
never shared my ideals with him. I was aware of the fact that 
I was pushing him away from me. 

I couldn’t do anything else. I have acted entirely according 
to my feelings, but I have acted in the way that was best for 
my peace of mind. Because I should completely lose my repose and self-confidence, which I have built up so shakily, if, 
at this stage, I were to accept criticisms of my half-completed 
task. And I can’t do that even from Pim, although it sounds 
very hard, for not only have I not shared my secret thoughts 
with Pim but I have often pushed him even further from me, 
by my irritability. 

This is a point that I think a lot about: why is it that Pim 
annoys me? So much so that I can hardly bear him teaching 
me, that his affectionate ways strike me as being put on, that 



I want to be left in peace and would really prefer it if he 
dropped me a bit, until I felt more certain in my attitude towards him. Because I still have a gnawing feeling of guilt over 
that horrible letter that I dared to write him when I was so 
wound up. Oh, how hard it is to be really strong and brave in 
every way! 

Yet this was not my greatest disappointment; no, I ponder 
far more over Peter than Daddy. I know very well that I conquered him instead of he conquering me. I created an image 
of him in my mind, pictured him as a quiet, sensitive, lovable 
boy, who needed affection and friendship. I needed a living 
person to whom I could pour out my heart; I wanted a friend 
who’d help to put me on the right road. I achieved what I 
wanted, and slowly but surely, I drew him towards me. Finally, when I had made him feel friendly, it automatically developed into an intimacy which, on second thought, I don’t 
think I ought to have allowed. 

We talked about the most private things, and yet up till 
now we have never touched on those things that filled, and 
still fill, my heart and soul. I still don’t know quite what to 
make of Peter, is he superficial, or does he still feel shy, even 
of me? But dropping that, I committed one error m my desire 
to make a real friendship: I switched over and tried to get at 
him by developmg it into a more intimate relation, whereas I 
should have explored all other possibilities. He longs to be 
loved and I can see that he’s beginning to be more and more 
in love with me. He gets satisfaction out of our meetings, 
whereas they just have the effect of making me want to try it 
out with him again. And yet I don’t seem able to touch on the 
subjects that I’m so longing to bring out into the daylight. I 
drew Peter towards me, far more than he realizes. Now he 
clings to me, and for the time being, I don’t see any way of 
shaking him off and putting him on his own feet. When I 
realized that he could not be a friend for my understanding, I 
thought I would at least try to lift him up out of his narrowmindedness and make him do something with his youth. 

“For m its innermost depths youth is lonelier than old age.” 

I read this saying in some book and I’ve always remembered 
it, and found it to be true. Is it true then that grownups have 
a more difficult time here than we do? No. I know it isn’t. 
Older people have formed their opinions about everything, 
and don’t waver before they act. It’s twice as hard for us 
young ones to hold our ground, and maintain our opinions, in 
a time when all ideals are being shattered and destroyed, 
when people are showing their worst side, and do not know 
whether to believe in truth and right and God. 

Anyone who claims that the older ones have a more difficult 
time here certainly doesn’t realize to what extent our problems 
weigh down on us, problems for which we axe probably much 
too young, but which thrust themselves upon us continually, 
until, after a long time, we think weve found a solution, but 
the solution doesn’t seem able to resist the facts which reduce 
it to nothing again. That’s the difficulty in these times: ideals, 
dreams, and cherished hopes rise within us, only to meet the 
horrible truth and be shattered. 

It’s really a wonder that I haven’t dropped all my ideals, 
because they seem so absurd and impossible to carry out. Yet 
I keep them, because m spite of everything I still believe that 
people are really good at heart. I simply can’t build up my 
hopes on a foundation consisting of confusion, misery, and 
death. I see the world gradually being turned into a wilderness, I hear the ever approaching thunder, which will destroy 
us too, I can feel the sufferings of millions and yet, if I look up 
into the heavens, I think that it will all come right, that this 
cruelty too will end, and that peace and tranquillity will return again. 

In the meantime, I must uphold my ideals, for perhaps the 
time will come when I shall be able to carry them out. 

Yours, Anne 

Friday , 21 July , 1944 

Dear Kitty, 

Now I am getting really hopeful, now things are going well 



at last. Yes, really, they re going well! Super news! An attempt has been made on Hitler's life and not even by Jewish 
communists or English capitalists this time, but by a proud 
German general, and what's more, he's a count, and still quite 
young. The Fuhrer's life was saved by Divine Providence and, 
unfortunately, he managed to get off with just a few scratches 
and burns. A few officers and generals who were with him 
have been killed and wounded. The chief culprit was shot. 

Anyway, it certainly shows that there are lots of officers and 
generals who are sick of the war and would like to see Hitler 
descend into a bottomless pit. When they’ve disposed of Hitler, their aim is to establish a military dictator, who will make 
peace with the Allies, then they intend to rearm and start another wax in about twenty years' time. Perhaps the Divine 
Power tarried on purpose in getting him out of the way, because it would be much easier and more advantageous to the 
Allies if the impeccable Germans kill each other off; it'll make 
less work for the Russians and the English and they'll be able 
to begin rebuilding their own towns all the sooner. 

But still, were not that far yet, and I don't want to anticipate the glorious events too soon. Still, you must have noticed, 
this is all sober reality and that I'm in quite a matter-of-fact 
mood today; for once, I’m not jabbering about high ideals. 
And what's more, Hitler has even been so kind as to announce 
to his faithful, devoted people that from now on everyone in 
the armed forces must obey the Gestapo, and that any soldier 
who knows that one of his superiors was involved in this low, 
cowardly attempt upon his life may shoot the same on the 
spot, without court-martial. 

What a perfect shambles it's going to be. Little Johnnie's 
feet begin hurting him during a long march, he’s snapped at 
by his boss, the officer, Johnnie grabs his rifle and cries out: 
"You wanted to murder the Fiihrer, so there's your reward,” 
One bang and the proud chief who dared to tick off little 
Johnnie has passed into eternal life (or is it eternal death?). 
In the end, whenever an officer finds himself up against a 
soldier, or having to take the lead, he'll be wetting his pants 
from anxiety, because the soldiers will dare to say more than 

they do. Do you gather a bit what I mean, or have I been 
skipping too much from one subject to another? I can’t help 
it, the prospect that I may be sitting on school benches next 
October makes me feel far too cheerful to be logical! Oh, 
dearie me, hadn’t I just told you that I didn’t want to be too 
hopeful? Forgive me, they haven’t given me the name “little 
bundle of contradictions” all for nothing! 

Yours, Anne