Wednesday, 23 February, 1944

Dear Kitty, 

It’s lovely weather outside and I’ve quite perked up since 
yesterday. Nearly every morning I go to the attic where Peter 
works to blow the stuffy air out of my lungs From my favorite spot on the floor I look up at the blue sky and the bare 
chestnut tree, on whose branches little raindrops shine, appearing like silver, and at the seagulls and the other birds as 
they glide on the wind . 

He stood with his head against a thick beam, and I sat 
down. We breathed the fresh air, looked outside, and both 
felt that the spell should not be broken by words. We remained like this for a long time, and when he had to go up to 
the loft to chop wood, I knew that he was a nice fellow. He 
climbed the ladder, and I followed, then he chopped wood 
for about a quarter of an hour, during which time we still 
remained silent. I watched him from where I stood, he was 
obviously doing his best to show off his strength. But I looked 
out of the open window too, over a large area of Amsterdam, 
over all the roofs and on to the horizon, which was such a 
pale blue that it was hard to see the dividmg line. “As long as 
this exists,” I thought, “and I may live to see it, this sunshine, 
the cloudless skies, while this lasts, I cannot be unhappy.” 

The best remedy for those who are afraid, lonely, or unhappy is to go outside, somewhere where they can be quite 
alone with the heavens, nature, and God. Because only then 



does one feel that all is as it should be and that God wishes 
to see people happy, amidst the simple beauty of nature. As 
long as this exists, and it certainly always will, I know that 
then there will always be comfort for every sorrow, whatever 
the circumstances may be. And I firmly believe that nature 
brings solace in all troubles. 

Oh, who knows, perhaps it wont be long before I can share 
this overwhelming feeling of bliss with someone who feels 
the way I do about it. 

Yours, Anne 

A thought: 

We miss so much here, so very much and for so long now: 
I miss it too, just as you do. I’m not talking of outward things, 
for we are looked after m that way, no, I mean the inward 
things. Like you, I long for freedom and fresh air, but I believe now that we have ample compensation for our privations. I realized this quite suddenly when I sat in front of the 
window this morning. I mean inward compensation. 

When I looked outside right into the depth of Nature and 
God, then I was happy, really happy. And Peter, so long as I 
have that happiness here, the joy m nature, health and a lot 
more besides, all the while one has that, one can always recapture happiness. 

Riches can all be lost, but that happiness in your own heart 
can only be veiled, and it will still bring you happiness again, 
as long as you live. As long as you can look fearlessly up into 
the heavens, as long as you know that you are pure within 
and that you will still find happiness.