Friday , 28 January, 1944

Dear Kitty, 

I asked myself this morning whether you don’t sometimes 
feel rather like a cow who has had to chew over all the old 
pieces of news again and agam, and who finally yawns loudly 
and silently wishes that Anne would occasionally dig up something new. 

Alas, I know it’s dull for you, but try to put yourself in my 
place, and imagine how sick I am of the old cows who keep 
having to be pulled out of the ditch again. If the conversation 
at mealtimes isn’t over politics or a delicious meal, then Mummy or Mrs. Van Daan trot out one of the old stories of their 
youth, which we’ve heard so many times before; or Dussel 
twaddles on about his wife’s extensive wardrobe, beautiful 
race horses, leaking rowboats, boys who can swim at the age 

of four, muscular pams and nervous patients. What it all boils 
down to is this- that if one of the eight of us opens his mouth, 
the other seven can finish the story for him! We all know the 
point of every joke from the start, and the storyteller is alone 
in laughing at his witticisms The various milkmen, grocers, 
and butchers of the two ex-housewives have already grown 
beards in our minds, so often have they been praised to the 
skies or pulled to pieces; it is impossible for anything in the 
conversation here to be fresh or new 

Still, all this would be bearable if the grownups didn’t have 
their little way of telling the stories, with which Koophuis, 
Henk, or Miep oblige the company, ten times over and adding 
their own little frills and furbelows, so that I often have to 
pinch my arm under the table to prevent myself from putting 
them right. Little children such as Anne must never, under 
any circumstances, know better than the grownups, however 
many blunders they make, and to whatever extent they allow 
their imaginations to run away with them. 

One favorite subject of Koophuis’s and Henk’s is that of 
people in hiding and in the underground movement. They 
know very well that anything to do with other people in hiding interests us tremendously, and how deeply we can sympathize with the sufferings of people who get taken away, and 
rejoice with the liberated prisoner. 

We are quite as used to the idea of going into hiding, or 
“underground,” as in bygone days one was used to Daddy’s 
bedioom slippers warming in front of the fire. 

There are a great number of organizations, such as “The 
Free Netherlands,” which forge identity cards, supply money 
to people “undergiound,” find hiding places for people, and 
work for young men in hiding, and it is amazing how much 
noble, unselfish work these people are doing, risking their own 
hves to help and save others. Our helpers are a very good example They have pulled us thiough up till now and we hope 
they will bring us safely to dry land. Otherwise, they will have 
to shaie the same fate as the many others who are being 
searched for. Never have we heard one word of the burden 


which we certainly must be to them, never has one of them 
complained of all the trouble we give. 

They all come upstairs every day, talk to the men about 
business and politics, to the women about food and wartime 
difficulties, and about newspapers and books with the children. They put on the brightest possible faces, bring flowers 
and presents for birthdays and bank holidays, are always 
ready to help and do all they can. That is something we must 
never forget; although others may show heroism in the war or 
against the Germans, our helpers display heroism in their 
cheerfulness and affection. 

The wildest tales are going around, but still they are usually 
founded on fact. For instance, Koophuis told us this week 
that in Gelderland two football elevens met, and one side consisted solely of members of the “underground” and the other 
was made up of members of the police. New ration books are 
being handed out in Hilversum. In order that the many people in hiding may also draw rations, the officials have given instructions to those of them in the district to come at a certam 
time, so that they can collect their documents from a separate 
little table Still, they’ll have to be careful that such impudent 
tricks do not reach the ears of the Germans. 

Yours, Anne