Wednesday, 4 August, 1943

Dear Kitty, 

Now that we have been in the “Secret Annexe” for over 
a year, you know something of our lives, but some of it is 
quite i ndesc ribable. There is so much to tell, everything 
is so different from ordinary times and from ordinary people's lives. But still, to give you a closer look into our lives, 
now and again I intend to give you a description of an 
ordinary day. Today Im beginning with the evening and 
night. 

Nine o'clock in the evening. The bustle of going to bed 
in the “Secret Annexe” begms and it is always really quite 
a business. Chairs are jshoved about, beds are pulled down, 
blankets unfolded, nothing remains where it is during the 
day. I sleep on the little .divan, which is not more than one 
and a half meters long. So chairs have to be used to lengthen 
it. An eiderdown, sheets, pillows, blankets, are all fetched 
from Dussel's bed where they remain during the day. One 
hears terrible creaking in the next room: Margot's concertinabed being pulled out. Again, divan, blankets, and pillows, 
everything is done to make the wooden slats a bit more 
comfoi table. It sounds like thunder above, but it is only 
Mrs. Van Daan’s bed. This is shifted to the window, you see, 
in order to give Her Majesty in the pink bed jacket fresh air 
to tickle her dainty nostrils I 

After Peter's finished, I step into the washing cubicle, 
where I give myself a thorough wash and general toilet; it 
occasionally happens (only in the hot weeks or months) 
that there is a tiny flea floating in the water. Then teeth 

ANNE FRANK 

cleaning, hair curling, manicure, and my cotton-wool pads 
with hydrogen peroxide (to bleach black mustache hairs)all this under half an hour. 

Half past nine. Quickly into dressing gown, soap in one 
hand, pottie, hairpins, pants, curlers, and cotton wool in 
the other, I hurry out of the bathroom; but usually I’m 
called back once for the various hairs which decorate the 
washbasin in graceful curves, but which are not approved of 
by the next person. 

Ten o'clock. Put up the blackout. Good night! For at 
least a quarter of an hour there is creaking of beds and a 
sighing of broken springs, then all is quiet, at least that is if 
our neighbors upstairs don’t quarrel in bed. 

Half past eleven. The bathroom door creaks. A narrow 
strip of light falls into the room. A squeak of shoes, a large 
coat, even larger than the man inside it-Dussel returns 
from his night work in Kraler’s office. Shuffling on the floor 
for ten minutes, crackle of paper (that is the food which has 
to be stowed away), and a bed is made. Then the form disappears again and one only hears suspicious noises from the 
lavatory from time to time. 

Three o'clock. I have to get up for a little job in the metal 
pot under my bed, which is on a rubber mat for safety’s sake 
in case of leakage. When this has to take place, I always 
hold my breath, as it clatters into the tin like a brook from 
a mountain. Then the pot is returned to its place and the 
figure in the white nightgown, which evokes the same cry 
from Margot every evening: “Oh, that indecent nightdress!” 
steps back into bed. 

Then a certain person lies awake for about a quarter of 
an hour, listening to the sounds of the night. Firstly, to 
whether there might not be a burglar downstairs, then to 
the various beds, above, next door, and in my room, from 
which one is usually able to make out how the various members of the household are sleeping, or how they pass the night 
in wakefulness. 

The latter is certainly not pleasant, especially when it concerns a member of the family by the name of Dussel. First, 



I hear a sound like a fish gasping for breath, this is repeated 
nine or ten times, then with much ado and interchanged 
with little smacking sounds, the lips are moistened, followed by a lengthy twisting and turning in bed and rearranging of pillows. Five minutes 5 perfect peace and then 
the same sequence of events unfolds itself at least three 
times more, after the doctor has soothed himself to sleep 
again for a little while. It can also happen that we get a bit 
of shooting in the night, varying between one o’clock and 
four. I never really realize it, until from habit I am already 
standing at my bedside. Sometimes I’m so busy dreaming 
that fm thinking about French irregular verbs or a quarrel 
upstairs. It is some time before I begin to realize that guns 
are firing and that I am still in the room. But it usually 
happens as described above. I quickly grab a pillow and 
handkerchief, put on my dressing gown and slippers, and 
scamper to Daddy, like Margot wrote in this birthday poem: 

The first shot sounds at dead of night. 

Hush , look! A door creab open wide , 

A little girl glides into sight , 

Clasping a pillow to her side. 

Once landed in the big bed, the worst is over, except if 
the firing gets very bad. 

Quarter to seven. Trrrrr-the alarm clock that raises its 
voice at any hour of the day (if one asks for it and sometimes when one doesn’t). Crack-ping-Mrs. Van Daan has 
turned it off. Creak-Mr. Van Daan gets up. Puts on water 
and then full speed to the bathroom. 

Quarter past seven. The door creaks again. Dussel can go 
to the bathroom. Once alone, I take down the blackoutand a new day in the “Secret Annexe” has begun. 

Yours, Anne 

ANNE FRANK 

Thursday , 5 August , 194S 

Dear Kitty, 

Today I am going to take lunchtime. 

It is half past twelve. The whole mixed crowd breathes 
again. The warehouse boys have gone home now. Above one 
can hear the noise of Mrs. Van Daan’s vacuum cleaner on 
her beautiful, and only, carpet. Margot goes with a few books 
under her arm for her Dutch lesson "for children who make 
no progress/’ because that’s Dussel’s attitude. Pim goes 
into a comer with his inseparable Dickens to try and find 
peace somewhere. Mummy hurries upstairs to help the 
industrious housewife, and I go to the bathroom to tidy it 
up a bit, and myself at the same time. 

Quarter to one. The place is filling up. First Mr. Van 
Santen, then Koophuis or Kraler, Elli and sometimes Miep 
as well. 

One o'clock. We’re all sitting listening to the 
seated around the baby wireless; these are the only times when 
the members of the "Secret Annexe” do not interrupt each 
other, because now someone is speaking whom even Mr. 
Van Daan can’t interrupt. 

Quarter past one. The great share-out. Everyone from 
below gets a cup of soup and if there is ever a pudding, 
some of that as well. Mr. Van Santen is happy and goes to 
sit on the divan or lean against the writing table. Newspaper, 
cup, and usually the cat, beside him. If one of the three is 
missing he’s sure to protest. Koophuis tells us the latest 
news from town, he is certainly an excellent source of information. Kraler comes helter-skelter upstairs— a short, firm 
knock on the door and in he comes rubbing his hands, according to his mood, in a good temper and talkative, or badtempered and quiet. 

Quarter to two. Everyone rises from the table and goes 
about his own business. Margot and Mummy to the dishes. 
Mr. and Mrs. Van Daan to their divan. Peter up to the attic. 
Daddy to the divan downstairs. Dussel to his bed and Anne 
to her work. Then follows the most peaceful hour; everyone 



is asleep, no one is disturbed. Dussel dreams of lovely food 
-the expression on his face gives this away, but I don't look 
long because the time goes so fast and at four o’clock the 
pedantic doctor is standing, clock in hand, because I’m one 
minute late in clearing the table for him. 

Yours, Anne 

Monday , 9 August , , 1943 

Dear Kitty, 

To continue the "Secret Annexe” daily timetable. I shall 
now describe the evening meal: 

Mr. Van Daan begins. He is first to be served, takes a 
lot of everything if it is what he likes. Usually talks at the 
same time, always gives his opinion as the only one worth 
listening to, and once he has spoken it is irrevocable. Because if anyone dares to question it, then he flares up at 
once. Oh, he can spit like a cat— I’d rather not argue, I can 
tell you— if you’ve once tried you don’t try again. He has 
the best opinion, he knows the most about everything. All 
right then, he has got brains, but "self-satisfaction” has 
reached a high grade with this gentleman. 

Madame. Really, I should remain silent. Some days, especially if there is a bad mood coming on, you can’t look at 
her face. On closer examination, she is the guilty one in all 
the arguments. Not the subject! Oh, no, everyone prefers to 
remain aloof over that, but one could perhaps call her the 
“kindler.” Stirring up trouble, that’s fun. Mrs. Frank against 
Anne; Margot against Daddy doesn’t go quite so easily. 

But now at table, Mrs. Van Daan doesn’t go short, although she thinks so at times. The tiniest potatoes, the sweetest mouthful, the best of everything; picking over is her 
system. The others will get their turn, as long as I have the 
best. Then talking. Whether anyone is interested, whether 
they are listening or not, that doesn’t seem to matter. I 
suppose she thinks: "Everyone is interested in what Mrs. 
Van Daan says.” Coquettish smiles, behaving as if one knew 


everything, giving everyone a bit of advice and encouragement, that’s sure to make a good impression. But if you look 
longer, then the good soon wears off. 

One, she is industrious, two, gay, three, a coquette— and, 
occasionally, pretty. This is Petronella Van Daan. 

The third table companion. One doesn’t hear much from 
him. Young Mr. Van Daan is very quiet and doesn't draw 
much attention to himself. As for appetite: a Danaidean 
vessel, which is never full and after the heartiest meal declares 
quite calmly that he could have eaten double. 

Number four— Margot. Eats like a little mouse and doesn’t 
talk at all. The only things that go down are vegetables and 
fruit. "Spoiled” is the Van Daans’ judgment; "not enough 
fresh air and games” our opinion. 

Beside her-Mummy. Good appetite, very talkative. No 
one has the impression, as Mrs. Van Daan: this is the housewife. What is the difference? Well, Mrs. Van Daan does the 
cooking, and Mummy washes up and polishes. 

Numbers six and seven. I won’t say much about Daddy 
and me. The former is the most unassuming of all at table. 
He looks first to see if everyone else has something. He needs 
nothing himself, for the best things are for the children. He 
is the perfect example, and sitting beside him, the “Secret 
Annexe’s” "bundle of nerves.” 

Dr. Dussel, Helps himself, never looks up, eats and doesn't 
talk. And if one must talk, then for heaven’s sake let it be 
about food. You don’t quarrel about it, you only brag. Enormous helpings go down and the word “No” is never heard, 
never when the food is good, and not often when it’s bad. 
Trousers wrapping his chest, red coat, black bedroom slippers, 
and horn-rimmed spectacles. That is how one sees him at the 
little table, always working, alternated only by his afternoon 
nap, food, and— his favorite spot-the lavatory. Three, four, 
five times a day someone stands impatiently in front of the 
door and wriggles, hopping from one foot to the other, 
hardly able to contain himself. Does it disturb him? Not a 
bit! From quarter past seven till half past, from half past 
twelve till one o’clock, from two till quarter past, from four 



till quarter past, from six till quarter past, and from half past 
eleven until twelve. One can make a note of it— these are 
the regular “sitting times.” He wont come off or pay any 
heed to an imploring voice at the door, giving warning of 
approaching disaster! 

Number nine isn't a member of the “Secret Annexe” 
fa mil y, but rather a companion in the house and at table. 
Elli has a healthy appetite. Leaves nothing on her plate and 
is not picky-and-choosy. She is easy to please and that is just 
what gives us pleasure. Cheerful and good-tempered, willing 
and good-natured, these are her characteristics. 

Yours, Anne 

Tuesday, 10 August , 1943 

Dear Kitty, 

New idea. I talk more to myself than to the others at 
mealtimes, which is to be recommended for two reasons. 
Firstly, because everyone is happy if I don't chatter the 
whole time, and secondly, I needn't get annoyed about other 
people's opinions. I don’t think my opinions are stupid and 
the others do; so it is better to keep them to myself. I do 
just the same if I have to eat something that I simply can’t 
stand. I put my plate in front of me, pretend that it is something delicious, look at it as little as possible, and before I 
' know where I am, it is gone. When I get up in the morning, 
also a very unpleasant process, I jump out of bed thinking 
to myself: “You’ll be back in a second,” go to the window, 
take down the blackout, sniff at the crack of the window 
until I feel a bit of fresh air, and I’m awake. The bed is 
turned down as quickly as possible and then the temptation 
is removed. Do you know what Mummy calls this sort of 
thing? “The Art of Living’-that’s an odd expression. For 
the last week we’ve all been in a bit of a muddle about time, 
because our dear and beloved Westertoren clock bell has 
apparently been taken away for war purposes, so that neither 
by day nor night do we ever know the exact time. I still 

ANNE FRANK 

have some hope that they will think up a substitute (tin, 
copper or some such thing) to remind the neighborhood of 
the clock. 

Whether I’m upstairs or down, or wherever I am, my 
feet are the admiration of all, glittering in a pair of (for these 
days) exceptionally fine shoes. Miep managed to get hold 
of them secondhand for 27.50 florins, wine-colored suede 
leather with fairly high wedge heels. I feel as if Im on stilts 
and look much taller than I am. 

Dussel has indirectly endangered our lives. He actually 
let Miep bring a forbidden book for him, one which abuses 
Mussolini and Hitler. On the way she happened to be ran 
into by an S.S. car. She lost her temper, shouted, “Miserable 
wretches/' and rode on. It is better not to think of what 
might have happened if she had had to go to their headquarters. 

Yours, Anne 

Wednesday, 18 August , 1948 

Dear Kitty, 

The title for this piece is: “The communal task of the day: 
potato peeling!” 

One person fetches the newspapers, another the knives 
(keeping the best for himself, of course), a third potatoes, 
and the fourth a pan of water. 

Mr. Dussel begins, does not always scrape well, but scrapes 
incessantly, glancing right and left. Does everyone do it the 
way he does? No* “Anne, look here; I take the knife in my 
hand like this, scrape from the top downwards! No, not like 
that — like this!” 

“I get on better like this, Mr. Dussel,” I remark timidly. 

“But still this is the best way. But du kannst take dies from 
me. Naturally I don’t care a bit, abet du must know for 
yourself.” We scrape on. I look slyly once in my neighbor s 
direction. He shakes his head thoughtfully once more (over 
me, I suppose) but is silent. 



I scrape on again. Now I look to the other side, where 
Daddy is sitting; for him scraping potatoes is not just a little 
odd job, but a piece of precision work. When he reads, he 
has a deep wrinkle at the back of his head, but if he helps 
prepare potatoes, beans, or any other vegetables, then it 
seems as if nothing else penetrates. Then he has on his "potato face,” and he would never hand over an imperfectly 
scraped potato; it's out of the question when he makes that 
facel 

I work on again and then just look up for a second; I know 
it already. Mrs. Van Daan is trying to attract Dussel’s attention. First she looks in his direction and Dussel appears not 
to notice anything. Then she winks an eye; Dussel works on. 
Then she laughs, Dussel doesn’t look up. Then Mummy 
laughs too; Dussel takes no notice. Mrs. Van Daan has not 
achieved anything, so she has to think of something else. A 
pause and then: "Putti, do put on an apronl Tomorrow I 
shall have to get all the spots out of your suit!” 

Tm not getting myself dirty!” 

Another moment’s silence. 

"Putti, why don’t you sit down?” 

Tm comfortable standing up and prefer it!” Pause. 

"Putti, look, du spatst schon!” ("You are making a mess!”) 

"Yes, Mammy, I’m being careful.” 

Mrs. Van Daan searches for another subject. "I say, Putti, 
why aren’t there any English air raids now?” 

"Because the weather is bad, Kerli.” 

"But it was lovely yesterday, and they didn’t fly then 
either.” 

"Let’s not talk about it.” 

"Why, surely one can talk about it, or give one’s opinion?” 

“No.” 

"Why ever not?” 

"Do be quiet, mammi’chen.” 

“Mr. Frank always answers his wife, doesn’t he?” 

Mr. Van Daan wrestles with himself. This is his tender 
spot, it’s something he can’t take and Mrs. Van Daan begins 
again: "The invasion seems as if it will never come!” 


Mr. Van Daan goes white; when Mrs. Van Daan sees this, 
she turns red, but goes on again: "The British do nothing!” 
The bomb explodes! 

"And now hold your tongue, donnerwetter-noch-einm&ir 

Mummy can hardly hold back her laughter. I look straight 
in front of me. 

This sort of thing happens nearly every day, unless they 
have just had a very bad quarrel, because then they both 
keep their mouths shut. 

I have to go up to the attic to fetch some potatoes. Peter 
is busy there debusing the cat. He looks up, the cat notices 
— pop—he has disappeared through the open window into 
the gutter. Peter swears. I laugh and disappear. 

Yours, Anne 

Friday , 20 August , 1943 

Dear Kitty, 

The men in the warehouse go home sharp at half past 
five and then we are free. 

Half past five. Elli comes to give us our evening freedom. 
Immediately we begin to make some headway with our work. 
First, I go upstairs with Elli, where she usually begins by 
having a bite from our second course. 

Before Elli is seated, Mrs. Van Daan begins thinking of 
things she wants. It soon comes out: "Oh, Elli, I have only 
one little wish. , . .* Elli winks at me; whoever comes upstairs, Mrs. Van Daan never misses a single opportunity of 
letting them know what she wants. That must be one of the 
reasons why none of them like coming upstairs. 

Quarter to six. Elli departs. I go two floors down to have 
a look around. First to the kitchen, then to the private office, 
after that the coalhole, to open the trap door for Mouschi. 
After a long tour of inspection I land up in Kraler’s room. 
Van Daan is looking in all the drawers and portfolios to find 
the day’s post. Peter is fetching the warehouse key and Boche; 
Pim is hauling the typewriters upstairs; Margot is looking 
for a quiet spot to do her office work; Mrs. Van Daan puts a 

THE DIARY OF A YOUNG GIRL 95 

kettle on the gas ring; Mummy is coming downstairs with a 
pan of potatoes; each one knows his own job. 

Peter soon returns from the warehouse. The first question is— bread. This is always put in the kitchen cupboard 
by the Ladies; but it is not there. Forgotten? Peter offers to 
look in the main office. He crouches in front of the door to 
make himself as small as possible and crawls towards the steel 
lockers on hands and knees, so as not to be seen from outside, gets the bread, which had been put there, and disappears; at least, he wants to disappear, but before he quite 
realizes what has happened, Mouschi has jumped over him 
and gone and sat right under the writing table. 

Peter looks all around— aha, he sees him there, he crawls 
into the office again and pulls the animal by its tail. Mouschi 
spits, Peter sighs. What has he achieved? Now Mouschi is 
sitting right up by the window cleaning himself, very 
pleased to have escaped Peter. Now Peter is holding a piece 
of bread under the cat’s nose as a last decoy. Mouschi will not 
be tempted and the door closes. I stood and watched it all 
through the crack of the door. We work on. Rat, tat, tat. 
Three taps means a meal! 

Yours, Ante 

Monday , 23 August , 1943 

Dear Kitty, 

Continuation of the ‘'Secret Annexe” daily timetable. As 
the clock strikes half past eight in the morning, Margot and 
Mummy are jittery: “Ssh . . . Daddy, quiet, Otto, ssh . . . 
Pirn.” “It is half past eight, come back here, you can’t run 
any more water; walk quietly!” These are the various cries to 
Daddy in the bathroom. As the clock strikes half past eight, 
he has to be in the living room. Not a drop of water, no 
lavatory, no walking about, everything quiet. As long as 
none of the office staff are there, everything can be heard in 
the warehouse. The door is opened upstairs at twenty minutes 
past eight and shortly after there are three taps on the floor: 

ANNE FRANK 

Arne’s porridge. I climb upstairs and fetch my “puppy-dog” 
plate. Down in my room again, everything goes at terrific 
speed: do my hair, put away my noisy tin pottie, bed in 
place. Hush, the clock strikes! Upstairs Mrs. Van Daan has 
changed her shoes and is shuffling about in bedroom slippers. 
Mr. Van Daan, too; all is quiet. 

Now we have a little bit of real family life. I want to 
read or work, Margot as well, also Daddy and Mummy. 
Daddy is sitting (with Dickens and the dictionary, naturally) 
on the edge of the sagging, squeaky bed, where there aren’t 
even any decent mattresses: two bolsters on top of each other 
will also serve the purpose, then he thinks: "Mustn’t have 
them, then I’ll manage without!” 

Once he is reading he doesn’t look up, or about him, laughs 
every now and then, takes awful trouble to get Mummy 
interested in a little story. Answer: “I haven’t got time now” 
Looks disappointed for just a second, then reads on again; 
a little later, when he comes to something extra amusing, 
he tries it again: "You must read this, Mummy!” Mummy 
sits on the “Opklap” 1 bed, reads, sews, knits, or works, whatever she feels like. She suddenly thinks of something Just 
says it quickly: “Anne, do you know . . . Margot, just jot 
down . . . !” After a while peace returns once more. 

Margot closes her book with a clap. Daddy raises his eyebrows into a funny curve, his reading wrinkle deepens again, 
and he is lost in his book once more; Mummy begins to 
chatter with Margot, I become curious and listen too 1 Pirn 
is drawn into the discussion . . . nine o’clock! Breakfast! 

Yours, Anne 

Friday, 10 September, 194S 

Dear Kitty, 

Every time I write to you something special seems to 
have happened, but they are more often unpleasant than 

^Dutch type of bed, which folds against the wall to look like a bookcase 
with curtains hanging before it 

pleasant things. However, now there is something wonderful going on. Last Wednesday evening, 8 September, we 
sat around listening to the seven o clock news and the first 
thing we heard was: “Here follows the best news of the 
whole war. Italy has capitulated!” Italy’s unconditional surrender! The Dutch program from England began at quarter 
past eight. “Listeners, an hour ago, I had just finished writing the chronicle of the day when the wonderful news of 
Italy’s capitulation came in. I can tell you that I have never 
deposited my notes in the wastepaper basket with such joy!” 
“God Save the King,” the American national anthem, and 
the “Internationale” were played. As always, the Dutch 
program was uplifting, but not too optimistic. 

Still we have troubles, too; it’s about Mr. Koophuis. As 
you know, we are all very fond of him, he is always cheerful 
and amazingly brave, although he is never well, has a lot of 
pain, and is not allowed to eat much or do much walking. 
“When Mr. Koophuis enters, the sun begins to shine,” 
Mummy said just recently, and she is quite right. Now he 
has had to go into the hospital for a very unpleasant abdominal operation and will have to stay there for at least 
four weeks. You really ought to have seen how he said good-by 
to us just as usual— he might have simply been going out to 
do a bit of shopping. 

Yours, Anne 

Thursday , 16 September , 194S 

Dear Kitty, 

Relations between us here are getting worse all the time. 
At mealtimes, no one dares to open their mouths (except 
to allow a mouthful of food to slip in) because whatever 
is said you either annoy someone or it is misunderstood. 
I swallow Valerian pills every day against worry and depression, but it doesn’t prevent me from being even more miserable the next day. A good hearty laugh would help more 
than ten Valerian pills, but we’ve almost forgotten how to 

ANNE FRANK 

laugh. I feel afraid sometimes that from having to be so 
serious m grow a long face and my mouth will droop at 
the corners. The others don t get any better either, everyone looks with fear and misgivings towards that great terror, 
winter. Another thing that does not cheer us up is the fact 
that the warehouseman, V.M., is becoming suspicious about 
the “Secret Annexe.” We really wouldn’t mind what V.M. 
thought of the situation if he wasn’t so exceptionally inquisitive, difficult to fob off, and, moreover, not to be trusted. 
One day Kraler wanted to be extra careful, put on his coat 
at ten minutes to one, and went to the chemist round the 
corner. He was back in less than five minutes, and sneaked 
like a thief up the steep stairs that lead straight to us. At a 
quarter past one he wanted to go again, but Elli came to 
warn him that V.M. was in the office. He did a right-about 
turn and sat with us until half past one. Then he took off 
his shoes and went in stockinged feet to the front attic 
door, went downstairs step by step, and, after balancing 
there for a quarter of an hour to avoid creaking, he landed 
safely in the office, having entered from the outside. Elli 
had been freed of V.M. in the meantime, and came up to us 
to fetch Kraler, but he had already been gone a long time; 
he was still on the staircase with his shoes off. Whatever 
would the people in the street have thought if they had 
seen the Manager putting on his shoes outside? Gosh! the 
Manager in his socks! 

Yours, Anne 

Wednesday, 29 September , 1943 

Dear Kitty, 

It is Mrs. Van Daan’s birthday. We gave her a pot of jam, 
as well as coupons for cheese, meat, and bread. From her 
husband, Dussel, and our protectors she received things 
to eat and flowers. Such are the times we live in! 

Elli had a fit of nerves this week, she had been sent out 
so often; time and again she had been asked to go and fetch 

the diary of a YOUNG GIRL 99 

something quickly, which meant yet another errand or made 
her feel that she had done something wrong. If you just think 
that she still has to finish her office work downstairs, that 
Koophuis is ill, Miep at home with a cold, and that she herself has a sprained ankle, love worries, and a grumbling 
father, then it's no wonder she's at her wit's end. We comforted her and said that if she puts her foot down once or 
twice and says she has no time, then the shopping lists will 
automatically get shorter. 

There is something wrong with Mr. Van Daan again, I 
can see it coming on already! Daddy is very angry for some 
reason or other. Oh, what kind of explosion is hanging over 
us now? If only I wasn't mixed up so much with all these 
rows! If I could only get away! They’ll drive us crazy before 
long! 

Yours, Anne 

Sunday , 17 October , 194S 

Dear Kitty, 

Koophuis is back again, thank goodness! He still looks 
rather pale, but in spite of this sets out cheerfully to sell 
clothes for Van Daan. It is an unpleasant fact that the 
Van Daans have run right out of money. Mrs. Van Daan 
won’t part with a thing from her pile of coats, dresses, and 
shoes, Mr. Van Daan’s suit isn’t easily disposed of, because 
he wants too much for it. The end of the story is not yet in 
sight. Mrs. Van Daan will certainly have to part with her 
fur coat. They’ve had a terrific row upstairs about it, and now 
the reconciliation period of “oh, darling Putti” and “precious 
Kerli” has set in. 

I am dazed by all the abusive exchanges that have taken 
place in this virtuous house during the past month. Daddy 
goes about with his lips tightly pursed; when anyone speaks 
to him, he looks up startled, as if he is afraid he will have 
to patch up some tricky relationship again. Mummy has red 
patches on her cheeks from excitement. Margot complains 


of headaches. Dussel can’t sleep. Mrs. Van Daan grouses 
the whole day and I’m going completely crazy! Quite honestly, I sometimes forget who we are quarreling with and 
with whom we’ve made it up. 

The only way to take one’s mind off it all is to study, and 
I do a lot of that. 

Yours, Anne 

Friday , 29 October , 1948 

Dear Kitty, 

There have been resounding rows again between Mr. and 
Mrs. Van Daan. It came about like this: as I have already 
told you, the Van Daans are at the end of their money. One 
day, some time ago now, Koophuis spoke about a furrier 
with whom he was on good terms; this gave Van Daan the 
idea of selling his wife’s fur coat. It’s a fur coat made from 
rabbit skms, and she has worn it seventeen years. He got 
325 florins for it— an enormous sum. However, Mrs. Van 
Daan wanted to keep the money to buy new clothes after the 
war, and it took some doing before Mr. Van Daan made it 
clear to her that the money was urgently needed for the 
household. 

The yells and screams, stamping and abuse— you can’t possibly imagine it! It was frightening. My family stood at the 
bottom of the stairs, holding their breath, ready if necessary 
to drag them apart! All this shouting and weeping and 
nervous tension are so unsettling and such a strain, that in 
the evening I drop into my bed crying, thanking heaven that 
I sometimes have half an hour to myself. 

Mr. Koophuis is away again; his stomach gives him no 
peace. He doesn’t even know whether it has stopped bleeding yet. For the first time, he was very down when he told us 
that he didn’t feel well and was going home. 

All goes well with me on the whole, except that I have 
no appetite. I keep being told: “You don’t look at all well/’ 
I must say that they are doing their very best to keep me 



up to the mark. Grape sugar, cod-liver oil, yeast tablets, and 
calcium have all been lined up. 

My nerves often get the better of me: it is especially on 
Sundays that I feel rotten. The atmosphere is so oppressive, 
and sleepy and as heavy as lead. You don’t hear a single bird 
singing outside, and a deadly close silence hangs everywhere, 
catching hold of me as if it will drag me down deep into an 
underworld. 

At such times Daddy, Mummy, and Margot leave me 
cold. I wander from one room to another, downstairs and 
up again, feeling like a songbird whose wings have been 
clipped and who is hurling himself in utter darkness against 
the bars of his cage. “Go outside, laugh, and take a breath 
of fresh air,” a voice cries within me, but I don’t even feel a 
response any more; I go and lie on the divan and sleep, to 
make the time pass more quickly, and the stillness and the 
terrible fear, because there is no way of killing them. 

Yours, Anne 

Wednesday, 8 November , 1948 

Dear Kitty, 

In order to give us something to do, which is also educational, Daddy applied for a prospectus from the Teachers’ 
Institute in Leiden. Margot nosed through the thick book 
at least three times without finding anything to her liking 
or to suit her purse. Daddy was quicker, and wants a letter 
written to the Institute asking for a trial lesson in “Elementary Latin.” 

To give me something new to begin as well, Daddy asked 
Koophuis for a children’s Bible so that I could find out 
something about the New Testament at last. “Do you want 
to give Anne a Bible for Chanuka?” asked Margot, somewhat perturbed. “Yes— er, I think St. Nicholas Day is a 
better occasion,” answered Daddy; “Jesus just doesn’t go with 
Chanuka .” 1 

Yours, Anne 

*See entry for 7 December, 1942. 


Monday evening , 8 November, 1943 

Dear Kitty, 

If you were to read my pile of letters one after another, 
yon would certainly be struck by the many different moods 
in which they are written. It annoys me that I am so dependent on the atmosphere here, but Fm certainly not the only 
one— we all find it the same. If I read a book that impresses 
me, I have to take myself firmly in hand, before I mix with 
other people; otherwise they would think my mind rather 
queer. At the moment, as youve probably noticed, I’m going 
through a spell of being depressed. I really couldn't tell you 
why it is, but I believe it's just because Fm a coward, and 
that’s what I keep bumping up against. 

This evening, while Elli was still here, there was a long, 
loud, penetrating ring at the door. I turned white at once, 
got a tummy-ache and heart palpitations, all from fear. At 
night, when Fm in bed, I see myself alone in a dungeon, 
without Mummy and Daddy. Sometimes I wander by the 
roadside or our "Secret Annexe” is on fire, or they come 
and take us away at night. I see everything as if it is actually 
taking place, and this gives me the feeling that it may all 
happen to me very soon! Miep often says she envies us for 
possessing such tranquillity here. That may be true, but she 
is not thinking about all our fears. I simply can’t imagine 
that the world will ever be normal for us again. I do talk 
about “after the war,” but then it is only a castle in the 
air, something that will never really happen. If I think 
back to our old house, my girl friends, the fun at school, it is 
just as if another person lived it all, not me. 

I see the eight of us with our “Secret Annexe” as if we 
were a little piece of blue heaven, surrounded by heavy black 
rain clouds. The round, clearly defined spot where we stand 
is still safe, but the clouds gather more closely about us 
and the circle which separates us from the approaching 
danger closes more and more tightly. Now we are so surrounded by danger and darkness that we bump against each 



other, as we search desperately for a means of escape. We 
all look down below, where people are fighting each other, 
we look above, where it is quiet and beautiful, and meanwhile we are cut off by the great dark mass, which will not let 
us go upwards, but which stands before us as an impenetrable 
wall; it tries to crush us, but cannot do so yet. I can only cry 
and implore: “Oh, if only the black circle could recede and 
open the way for usl” 

Yours, Anne