Friday, 25 September, 1942

Dear Kitty, 

Yesterday evening I went upstairs and “visited” the Van 
Daans. I do so occasionally to have a chat. Sometimes it 
can be quite fun. Then we have some moth biscuits (the 
biscuit tin is kept in the wardrobe which is full of
mothballs) and drink lemonade. We talked about Peter. I told 
them how Peter often strokes my cheek and that I wished 
he wouldn’t as I don’t like being pawed by boys. 

In a typical way parents have, they asked if I couldn’t get 
fond of Peter, because he certainly liked me very much. I 
thought “Oh dear!” and said: “Oh, no!” Imagine it! 

I did say that I thought Peter rather awkward, but that it 
was probably shyness, as many boys who haven't had much 
to do with girls are like that. 

I must say that the Refuge Committee of the “Secret 
Annexe” (male section) is very ingenious. Ill tell you what 
they've done now to get news of us through to Mr. Van 
Dijk, Travies’ chief representative and a friend who has
surreptitiously hidden some of our things for us! They typed 
a letter to a chemist in South Zeeland, who does business 
with our firm, in such a way that he has to send the enclosed 
reply back in an addressed envelope. Daddy addressed the 
envelope to the office. When this envelope arrives from 
Zeeland, the enclosed letter is taken out, and is replaced by 
a message in Daddy's handwriting as a sign of life. Like 
this, Van Dijk won't become suspicious when he reads the 
note. They specially chose Zeeland because it is so close to 
Belgium and the letter could have easily been smuggled over 
the border, in addition no one is allowed into Zeeland
without a special permit; so if they thought we were there, he 
couldn't try and look us up. 

Yours, Anne 

Sunday , 27 September , 1942 

Dear Kitty, 

Just had a big bust-up with Mummy for the umpteenth 
time; we simply don’t get on together these days and Margot 
and I don't hit it off any too well either. As a rule we don’t go 
in for such outbursts as this in our family. Still, it's by no 
means always pleasant for me. Margot's and Mummy’s natures 
are completely strange to me. I can understand my friends 
better than my own mother-too bad! 

We often discuss postwar problems, for example, how one 
ought to address servants. 

Mrs. Van Daan had another tantrum. She is terribly moody. 
She keeps hiding more of her private belongings. Mummy 
ought to answer each Van Daan “disappearance” with a Frank 
“disappearance.” How some people do adore bringing up 
other people's children in addition to their own. The Van 
Daans are that kind. Margot doesn’t need it, she is such a 
goody-goody, perfection itself, but I seem to have enough
mischief in me for the two of us put together. You should hear us 
at mealtimes, with reprimands and cheeky answers flying to 
and fro. Mummy and Daddy always defend me stoutly. I’d 
have to give up if it weren't for them. Although they do tell 
me that I mustn't talk so much, that I must be more retiring 
and not poke my nose into everything, still I seem doomed to 
failure. If Daddy wasn't so patient, I’d be afraid I was going 
to turn out to be a terrific disappointment to my parents and 
they are pretty lenient with me. 

If I take a small helping of some vegetable I detest and 
make up with potatoes, the Van Daans, and Mevrouw in
particular, can’t get over it, that any child should be so spoiled. 

“Come along, Anne, have a few more vegetables,” she says 
straight away. 

“No, thank you, Mrs. Van Daan,” I answer, “I have plenty 
of potatoes.” 

“Vegetables are good for you, your mother says so too. Have 
a few more,” she says, pressing them on me until Daddy comes 
to my rescue. 

Then we have from Mrs. Van Daan-“You ought to have 
been in our home, we were properly brought up. It’s absurd 
that Anne's so frightfully spoiled. I wouldn’t put up with it if 
Anne were my daughter.” 

These are always her first and last words “if Anne were my 
daughter.” Thank heavens I’m not! 

But to come back to this “upbringing” business. There was 
a deadly silence after Mrs. Van Daan had finished speaking 
yesterday. Then Daddy said, “I think Anne is extremely well 
brought up; she has learned one thing anyway, and that is to 
make no reply to your long sermons. As to the vegetables, 
look at your own plate.” Mrs. Van Daan was beaten, well and 
truly beaten. She had taken a minute helping of vegetables 
herself. But she is not spoiled! Oh, no, too many vegetables in 
the evening make her constipated. Why on earth doesn’t she 
keep her mouth shut about me, then she wouldn’t need to 
make such feeble excuses. It’s gorgeous the way Mrs. Van 
Daan blushes. I don’t and that is just what she hates. 

Yours, Anne