Wednesday , 10 March, 1943

Dear Kitty, 

We Rad a short circuit last evening, and on top of that the 
guns kept banging away all the time. I still haven't got over 
my fear of everything connected with shooting and planes, 
and I creep into Daddy's bed nearly every night for comfort. 
I know it's very childish but you don't know what it is like. 
The A.A. guns roar so loudly that you cant hear yourself 
speak. Mrs. Van Daan, the fatalist, was nearly crying, and 
said in a very timid little voice, “Oh, it is so unpleasant! Oh, 
they are shooting so hard,” by which she really means Tm so 
frightened.” 

It didn't seem nearly so bad by candlelight as in the dark. 
I was shivering, just as if I had a temperature, and begged 
Daddy to light the candle again. He was relentless, the light 
remained off. Suddenly there was a burst of machine-gun fire, 
and that is ten times worse than guns. Mummy jumped out of 
bed and, to Pirn's annoyance, lit the candle. When he complained her answer was firm: “After all, Anne's not exactly a 
veteran soldier.” And that was the end of it. 

Have I already told you about Mrs. Van Daan's other fears? 
I don't think so. If I am to keep you informed of all that happens in the “Secret Annexe,” you must know about this too. 
One night Mrs. Van Daan thought she heard burglars in the 
attic; she heard loud footsteps and was so frightened that she 
woke her husband. Just at that moment the burglars disappeared and the only sounds that Mr. Van Daan could hear 
were the heartbeats of the frightened fatalist herself. “Oh, 
Putti [Mr. Van Daan's nickname], they are sure to have taken 
the sausages and all our peas and beans. And Peter, I wonder 
if he is still safely in bed?” “They certainly won't have stolen 
Peter. Listen, don’t worry and let me go to sleep.” But nothing 
came of that. Mrs. Van Daan was far too nervous to sleep another wink. A few nights after that the whole Van Daan family was woken by ghostly sounds. Peter went up to the attic 
with a torch— and scamper-scamper! What do you think it 
was running away? A swarm of enormous rats ? When we knew 

ANNE FRANK 

who the thieves were, we let Mouschi sleep in the attic and 
the uninvited guests didn't come back again; at least not during the night. 

Peter went up to the loft a couple of evenings ago to fetch 
some old newspapers. He had to hold the trap door firmly to 
get down the steps. He put his hand down without looking 
. . . and went tumbling down the ladder from the sudden 
shock and pain. Without knowing it he had put his hand on 
a large rat, and it had bitten him hard. By the time he 
reached us, as white as a sheet and with his knees knocking, 
the blood had soaked through his pajamas. And no wonder; 
it's not very pleasant to stroke a large rat; and to get bitten into 
the bargain is really dreadful. 

Yours, Anne