Friday, 23 July, 1948

Dear Kitty, 

Just for fun I’m going to tell you each person's first wish, 
when we are allowed to go outside again. Margot and Mr. 
Van Daan long more than anything for a hot bath filled to 
overflowing and want to stay in it for half an hour. Mrs. Van 
Daan wants most to go and eat cream cakes immediately. 
Dussel thinks of nothing but seeing Lotje, his wife; Mummy 
of her cup of coffee; Daddy is going to visit Mr. Vossen first; 
Peter the town and a cinema, while I should find it so blissful, I shouldn't know where to start! But most of all, I long 
for a home of our own, to be able to move freely and to have 
some help with my work again at last, in other words-school. 

Elli has offered to get us some fruit. It costs next to nothing-grapes f.5.00 per kilo, gooseberries f.0.70 per pound, one 
peach f.0.50, one kilo melon f.1.50. 1 Then you see in the 
newspapers every evening in bold letters, "Play fair and keep 
prices down!" 

Yours, Anne 

Equivalent prices, in order, would be approximately $140, twenty-one 
cents, fourteen cents, and forty-two cents. 

Monday , 26 July , 1943 

Dear Kitty, 

Nothing but tumult and uproar yesterday, we are still very 
het up about it all. You might really ask, does a day go by 
without some excitement? 

We had the first warning siren while we were at breakfast, 
but we don't give a hoot about that, it only means that the 
planes are crossing the coast. 

After breakfast I went and lay down for an hour as I had 
a bad headache, then I went downstairs. It was about two 
o'clock. Margot had finished her office work at half past two; 
she had not packed her things together when the sirens began 
to wail, so upstairs I went again with her. It was high time, 
for we had not been upstairs five minutes when they began 
shooting hard, so much so that we went and stood in the passage. And yes, the house rumbled and shook, and down came 
the bombs. 

I clasped my "escape bag" close to me, more because I 
wanted to have something to hold than with an idea of 
escaping, because there's nowhere we can go. If ever we come 
to the extremity of fleeing from here, the street would be 
just as dangerous as an air raid. This one subsided after half 
an hour, but the activity in the house increased. Peter came 
down from his lookout post in the attic, Dussel was in the 
main office, Mrs. Van Daan felt safe in the private office, 
Mr. Van Daan had been watching from the loft, and we on 
the little landing dispersed ourselves too; I went upstairs 
to see rising above the harbor the columns of smoke Mr. 
Van Daan had told us about. Before long you could smell 
burning, and outside it looked as if a thick mist hung everywhere. Although such a big fire is not a pleasant sight, luckily 
for us it was all over, and we went about our respective tasks. 
That evening at dinner; another air raid alarm! It was a nice 
meal, but my hunger vanished, simply at the sound of the 
alarm. Nothing happened and three quarters of an hour 
later it was all clear. The dishes were stacked ready to be 
done; air-raid warning, ack-ack fire, an awful lot of planes. 


“Oh, dear me, twice in one day, that’s too much,” we all 
thought, but that didn't help at all; once again the bombs 
rained down, the other side this time, on Schiphol , 1 according to the British. The planes dived and climbed, we heard 
the hum of their engines and it was very gruesome. Each 
moment I thought: “One's falling now. Here it comes.” 

I can assure you that when I went to bed at nine o'clock 
I couldn't hold my legs still. I woke up at the stroke of 
twelve: planes. Dussel was undressing. I didn't let that put 
me off, and at the first shot, I leaped out of bed, wide awake. 
Two hours with Daddy and still they kept coming. Then they 
ceased firing and I was able to go to bed. I fell asleep at half 
past two. 

Seven o'clock. I sat up in bed with a start. Mr. Van Daan 
was with Daddy. Burglars was my first thought. I heard Mr. 
Van Daan say “everything.” I thought that everything had 
been stolen. But no, this time it was wonderful news, such 
as we have not heard for months, perhaps in all the war 
years. “Mussolini has resigned, the King of Italy has taken 
over the government.” We jumped for joy. After the terrible 
day yesterday, at last something good again and-hope. Hope 
for it to end, hope for peace. 

Kraler called in and told us that Fokkers has been badly 
damaged. Meanwhile we had another air-raid alarm with 
planes overhead and one more warning siren. I'm just about 
choked with alarms, very tired and don’t feel a bit like work. 
But now the suspense over Italy will awaken the hope that it 
will soon end, perhaps even this year. 

Yours, Anne 

Thursday , 29 July , 1948 

Dear Kitty, 

Mrs. Van Daan, Dussel, and I were doing the dishes and 
I was extraordinarily quiet, which hardly ever happens, so 
they would have been sure to notice. 

Amsterdam airport 

In order to avoid questions I quickly sought a fairly neutral 
topic, and thought that the book Henry from the Other 
Side would meet the need. But I had made a mistake. If Mrs. 
Van Daan doesn't pounce on me, then Mr. Dussel does. This 
was what it came to: Mr. Dussel had specially recommended 
us this book as being excellent. Margot and I thought it was 
anything but excellent The boys character was certainly 
well drawn, but the rest-I had better gloss over that. I said 
something to that effect while we were washing the dishes, 
but that brought me a packet of trouble. 

"How can you understand the psychology of a man! Of 
a child is not so difficult (1). You are much too young for 
a book like that; why, even a man of twenty would not be 
able to grasp it." (Why did he so especially recommend this 
book to Margot and me?) Now Dussel and Mrs. Van Daan 
continued together: “You know much too much about things 
that are unsuitable for you, you ve been brought up all wrong. 
Later on, when you are older, you won t enjoy anything, 
then you'll say: T read that in books twenty years ago/ You 
had better make haste, if you want to get a husband or fall 
in love-or everything is sure to be a disappointment to you. 
You are already proficient in the theory, it s only the practice 
that you still lack!" 

I suppose it's their idea of a good upbringing to always try 
to set me against my parents, because that is what they often 
do. And to tell a girl of my age nothing about "grown-up” 
subjects is an equally fine methodl I see the results of that 
kind of upbringing frequently and all too clearly. 

I could have slapped both their faces at that moment as 
they stood there making a fool of me. I was beside myself 
with rage and I'm just counting the days until I'm rid of 
"those" people. 

Mrs. Van Daan is a nice one! She sets a fine example . . . 
she certainly sets one— a bad one. She is well known as being 
very pushing, selfish, cunning, calculating, and is never content. I can also add vanity and coquetry to the list. There 
is no question about it, she is an unspeakably disagreeable 
person. I could write whole chapters about Madame, and 


who knows, perhaps I will someday. Anyone can put on a fine 
coat of varnish outside. Mrs. Van Daan is friendly to 
strangers and especially men, so it is easy to make a mistake 
when you have only known her for a short time. Mummy 
thinks she is too stupid to waste words over, Margot too 
unimportant, Pirn too ugly (literally and figuratively), and 
I, after long observation— for I was never prejudiced from the 
start-have come to the conclusion that she is all three and 
a lot more! She has so many bad qualities, why should I 
even begin about one of them? 

Yours, Anne 

P.S.— Will the reader take into consideration that when 
this story was written the writer had not cooled down from 
her fury! 

Tuesday , 3 August , 1943 

Dear Kitty, 

Political news excellent. In Italy the Fascist party has 
been banned. The people are fighting the Fascists in many 
places-even the army is actually taking part in the battle. 
Can a country like that wage war against England? 

We've just had a third air raid; I clenched my teeth together to make myself feel courageous. Mrs. Van Daan, who 
has always said, <C A terrible end is better than no end at all,* 
is the greatest coward of us all now. She was shaking like a 
leaf this morning and even burst into tears. When her husband, with whom she has just made it up after a week's 
squabbling, comforted her, the expression on her face alone 
almost made me feel sentimental. 

Mouschi has proved that keeping cats has disadvantages as 
well as advantages. The whole house is full of fleas, and the 
plague gets worse every day. Mr. Koophuis has scattered 
yellow powder in every nook and comer, but the fleas don't 
seem to mind a bit. It's making us all quite nervous; one 
keeps imagining an itch on one's arms, legs, and various parts 

of the body, which is why quite a lot of us are doing gymnastics, SO 1 as to be able to look at the back of our necks or 
legs while standing up. Now were being paid back for not 
bemg more supple-were too stiff to even turn our heads 
properly. We gave up real gymnastics long ago. 

Yours, Anne