Saturday, 15 April, 1944

Dear Kitty, 

"Shock upon shock. Will there ever be an end?” We honestly can ask ourselves that question now. Guess what's the 
latest. Peter forgot to unbolt the front door (which is bolted 
on the inside at night) and the lock of the other door doesn't 
work. The result was that Kraler and the men could not get 
into the house, so he went to the neighbors, forced open the 
kitchen window, and entered the building from the back. He 
is livid at us for being so stupid. 

I can tell you, it's upset Peter frightfully. At one meal, when 
M umm y said she felt more sorry for Peter than anyone else, 
he almost started to cry. Were all just as much to blame as he 
is, because nearly every day the men ask whether the door’s 
been unbolted and, just today, no one did. 

Perhaps I shall be able to console him a bit later on; I 
would so love to help him. 

Yours, Anne 

Sunday morning, just before eleven o'clock, 

16 April, 1944 

Darlingest Kitty, 

Remember yesterday's date, for it is a very important day 
in my life. Surely it is a great day for every girl when she re
iTwo members of the wartime Dutch Cabinet-in-Exile in London. 



ceives her first kiss? Well, then, it is just as important for me 
too! Brains kiss on my right cheek doesn’t count any more, 
likewise the one from Mr. Walker on my right hand. 

How did I suddenly come by this kiss? Well, I will tell you. 

Yesterday evening at eight o’clock I was sitting with Peter 
on his divan, it wasn’t long before his arm went round me. 
“Let’s move up a bit,” I said, “then I don’t bump my head 
against the cupboard.” He moved up, almost into the comer, 
I laid my arm under his and across his back, and he just about 
buried me, because his arm was hanging on my shoulder. 

Now we’ve sat like this on other occasions, but never so 
close together as yesterday. He held me firmly against him, 
my left shoulder against his chest; already my heart began to 
beat faster, but we had not finished yet. He didn’t rest until 
my head was on his shoulder and his against it. When I sat 
upright again after about five minutes, he soon took my head 
in his hands and laid it against him once more. Oh, it was so 
lovely, I couldn’t talk much, the joy was too great. He stroked 
my cheek and arm a bit awkwardly, played with my curls and 
our heads lay touching most of the time. I can’t tell you, Kitty, 
the feeling that ran through me all the while. I was too happy 
for words, and I believe he was as well. 

We got up at half past eight. Peter put on his gym shoes, 
so that when he toured the house he wouldn’t make a noise, 
and I stood beside him. How it came about so suddenly, I 
don’t know, but before we went downstairs he kissed me, 
through my hair, half on my left cheek, half on my ear; I tore 
downstairs without looking round, and am simply longing for 
today! 

Yours, Anne 

Monday , 17 April , 1944 

Dear Kitty, 

Do you think that Daddy and Mummy would approve of 
my sitting and kissing a boy on a divan— a boy of seventeen 
and a half and a girl of just under fifteen? I don’t really think 
they would, but I must rely on myself over this. It is so quiet 



and peaceful to lie in his arms and to dream, it is so thrilling 
to feel his cheek against mine, it is so lovely to know that 
there is someone waiting for me. But there is indeed a big 
“but,” because will Peter be content to leave it at this? I 
haven t forgotten his promise already, but ... he is a boy! 

I know myself that I’m starting very soon, not even fifteen, 
and so independent already! It’s certainly hard for other 
people to understand, I know almost for certain that Margot 
would never kiss a boy unless there had been some talk of an 
engagement or marriage, but neither Peter nor I have anything like that in mind. I’m sure too that Mummy never 
touched a man before Daddy. What would my girl friends 
say about it if they knew that I lay in Peters arms, my heart 
against his chest, my head on his shoulder and with his head 
against mine! 

Oh, Anne, how scandalous! But honestly, I don’t think it 
Is; we are shut up here, shut away from the world, in fear and 
anxiety, especially just lately. Why, then, should we who love 
each other remain apart? Why should we wait until we’ve 
reached a suitable age? Why should we bother? 

I have taken it upon myself to look after myself; he would 
never want to cause me sorrow or pain. Why shouldn’t I 
follow the way my heart leads me, if it makes us both happy? 
All the same, Kitty, I believe you can sense that I’m in doubt, 
I think it must be my honesty which rebels against doing 
anything on the sly! Do you think it’s my duty to tell Daddy 
what I’m doing? Do you think we should share our secret with 
a third person? A lot of the beauty would be lost, but would 
my conscience feel happier? I will discuss it with “him.” 

Oh, yes, there’s still so much I want to talk to him about, 
for I don’t see the use of only just cuddling each other. To 
exchange our thoughts, that shows confidence and faith in 
each other, we would both be sure to profit by it! 

Yours, Anne 

Tuesday , 18 April , 1944 

Dear Kitty, 

Everything goes well here. Daddy's just said that he definitely expects large-scale operations to take place before the 
twentieth of May, both in Russia and Italy, and also in the 
West; I find it more and more difficult to imagine our liberation from here. 

Yesterday Peter and I finally got down to our talk, which 
had already been put off for at least ten days. I explained 
everything about girls to him and didn't hesitate to discuss 
the most intimate things. The evening ended by each giving 
the other a kiss, just about beside my mouth, it's really a lovely 
feeling. 

Perhaps IH take my diary up there sometime, to go more 
deeply into things for once. I don't get any satisfaction out 
of lying in each other's arms day in, day out, and would so 
like to feel that he's the same. 

We are having a superb spring after our long, lingering 
winter; April is really glorious, not too hot and not too cold, 
with little showers now and then. Our chestnut tree is already quite greenish and you can even see little blooms here 
and there. 

Elli gave us a treat on Saturday, by bringing four bunches 
of flowers, three bunches of narcissus and one of grape hyacinths, the latter being for me. 

I must do some algebra, Kitty-good-by. 

Yours, Anne