Tuesday , 4 April, 1944

Dear Kitty, 

For a long time I haven't had any idea of what I was working for any more; the end of the war is so terribly far away, 
so unreal, like a fairy tale. If the war isn't over by September 
I shan't go to school any more, because I don’t want to be 
two years behind. Peter filled my days-nothing but Peter, 
dreams and thoughts until Saturday, when I felt so utterly 
miserable; oh, it was terrible. I was holding back my tears all 
the while I was with Peter, then laughed with Van Daan over 
lemon punch, was cheerful and excited, but the moment I 
was alone I knew that I would have to cry my heart out. So, 
clad in my nightdress, I let myself go and slipped down onto 
the floor. First I said my long prayer very earnestly, then I 
cried with my head on my arms, my knees bent up, on the 
bare floor, completely folded up. One large sob brought me 
back to earth again, and I quelled my tears because I didn’t 
want them to hear anything in the next room. Then I began 
trying to talk some courage into myself. I could only say: “I 
must, I must, I must . . Completely stiff from the unnatural 
position, I fell against the side of the bed and fought on, until 
I climbed into bed again just before half past ten. It was over! 

And now it's all over. I must work, so as not to be a fool, to 
get on, to become a journalist, because that's what I want! I 
know that I can write, a couple of my stories are good, my 
descriptions of the “Secret Annexe” are humorous, there’s a 

THE DIARY OF A YOUNG GIRL 175 

lot in my diary that speaks, but-whether I have real talent 
remains to be seen. 

"Eva's Dream" is my best fairy tale, and the queer thing 
about it is that I don't know where it comes from. Quite a lot 
of “Cady's Life" is good too, but, on the whole, it's nothing. 

I am the best and sharpest critic of my own work. I know 
myself what is and what is not well written. Anyone who 
doesn't write doesn't know how wonderful it is; I used to bemoan the fact that I couldn't draw at all, but now I am more 
than happy that I can at least write. And if I haven't any 
talent for writing books or newspaper articles, well, then I can 
always write for myself. 

I want to get on; I can't imagine that I would have to lead 
the same sort of life as Mummy and Mrs. Van Daan and all 
the women who do their work and are then forgotten. I must 
have something besides a husband and children, something 
that I can devote myself to! 

I want to go on living even after my death! And therefore 
I am grateful to God for giving me this gift, this possibility of 
developing myself and of writing, of expressing all that is in 
me. 

I can shake off everything if I write; my sorrows disappear, 
my courage is reborn. But, and that is the great question, will 
I ever be able to write anything great, will I ever become a 
journalist or a writer? I hope so, oh, I hope so very much, for 
I can recapture everything when I write, my thoughts, my 
ideals and my fantasies. 

I haven't done anything more to “Cady's Life" for ages; in 
my mind I know exactly how to go on, but somehow it doesn't 
flow from my pen. Perhaps I never shall finish it, it may land 
up in the wastepaper basket, or the fire . . , that's a horrible 
idea, but then I think to myself, “At the age of fourteen and 
with so little experience, how can you write about philosophy?" 

So I go on again with fresh courage; I think I shall succeed, 
because I want to write! 

Yours, Anne