Wednesday , 14 June, 1944

Dear Kitty, 

My head is haunted by so many wishes and thoughts, accusations and reproaches. I’m really not as conceited as so many 
people seem to think, I know my own faults and shortcomings 
better than anyone, but the difference is that I also know that 
I want to improve, shall improve, and have already improved 
a great deal. 

Why is it then, I so often ask myself, that everyone still 
thinks I’m so terribly knowing and forward? Am I so knowing? 
Is it that I really am, or that maybe the others aren’t? That 
sounds queer, I realize now, but I shan’t cross out the last sentence, because it really isn’t so crazy. Everyone knows that 
Mrs. Van Daan, one of my chief accusers, is unintelligent. I 
might as well put it plainly and say "stupid.” Stupid people 
usually can’t take it if others do better than they do. 

Mrs. Van Daan thinks I’m stupid because I’m not quite so 
lacking in intelligence as she is; she thinks I’m forward because she’s even more so; she thinks my dresses are too short, 
because hers are even shorter. And that’s also the reason that 
she thinks I’m knowing, because she’s twice as bad about joining in over subjects she knows absolutely nothing about. But 
one of my favorite sayings is "There’s no smoke without fire,” 
and I readily admit that I’m knowing. 

Now the trying part about me is that I criticize and scold 
myself far more than anyone else does. Then if Mummy adds 

her bit of advice the pile of sermons becomes so insurmountable that in my despair I become rude and start contradicting 
and then, of course, the old well-known Anne watchword 
comes back: “No one understands me!” This phrase sticks in 
my mind; I know it sounds silly, yet there is some truth in it. I 
often accuse myself to such an extent that I simply long for a 
word of comfort, for someone who could give me sound advice and also draw out some of my real self; but, alas, I keep 
on looking, but I haven't found anyone yet. 

I know that you'll immediately think of Peter, won’t you, 
Kit? It's like this: Peter loves me not as a lover but as a friend 
and grows more affectionate every day. But what is the mysterious something that holds us both back? I don't understand 
it myself. Sometimes I think that my terrible longing for him 
was exaggerated, yet that's really not it, because if I don't go 
up to see him for two days, then I long for him more desperately than ever before. Peter is good and he's a darling, but 
still there's no denying that there’s a lot about him that disappoints me. Especially his dislike of religion and all his talk 
about food and various other things don't appeal to me. Yet I 
feel quite convinced that we shall never quarrel now that 
we've made that straightforward agreement together. Pete is a 
peace-loving person; he’s tolerant and gives in very easily. He 
lets me say a lot of things to him that he would never accept 
from his mother, he tries most persistently to keep his things 
in order. And yet why should he keep his innermost self to 
himself and why am I never allowed there? By nature he is 
more closed-up than I am, I agree, but I know-and from my 
own experience-that at some time or other even the most uncommunicative people long just as much, if not more, to find 
someone in whom they can confide. 

Both Peter and I have spent our most meditative years in 
the “Secret Annexe.” We often discuss the future, the past, 
and the present, but, as I've already said, I still seem to miss 
the real thing and yet I know that it's there. 

Yours, Anne 



Thursday , 15 June , 1944 



Dear Kitty, 

I wonder if it's because I haven't been able to poke my nose 
outdoors for so long that I’ve grown so crazy about everything 
to do with nature? I can perfectly well remember that there 
was a time when a deep blue sky, the song of the birds, moonlight and flowers could never have kept me spellbound. Thats 
changed since I’ve been here. 

At Whitsun, for instance, when it was so warm, I stayed 
awake on purpose until half past eleven one evening in order 
to have a good look at the moon for once by myself. Alas, the 
sacrifice was all in vain, as the moon gave far too much light 
and I didn’t dare risk opening a window. Another time, some 
months ago now, I happened to be upstairs one evening when 
the window was open. I didn’t go downstairs until the window 
had to be shut. The dark, rainy evening, the gale, the scudding clouds held me entirely in their power; it was the first 
time in a year and a half that I’d seen the night face to face. 
After that evening my longing to see it again was greater than 
my fear of burglars, rats, and raids on the house. I went downstairs all by myself and looked outside through the windows 
in the kitchen and the private office. A lot of people are fond 
of nature, many sleep outdoors occasionally, and people in 
prisons and hospitals long for the day when they will be free 
to enjoy the beauties of nature, but few are so shut away and 
isolated from that which can be shared alike by rich and poor. 
It’s not imagination on my part when I say that to look up at 
the sky, the clouds, the moon, and the stars makes me calm 
and patient. It’s a better medicine than either Valerian or 
bromine, Mother Nature makes me humble and prepared to 
face every blow courageously. 

Alas, it has had to be that I am only able— except on a few 
rare occasions-to look at nature through dirty net curtains 
hanging before very dusty windows. And it’s no pleasure looking through these any longer, because nature is just the one 
thing that really must be unadulterated. 

Yours, Anne 

m 

Friday, 16 June , 1944 

Dear Kitty, 

New problems: Mrs. Van Daan is desperate, talks about a 
bullet through her head, prison, hanging, and suicide. She’s 
jealous that Peter confides in me and not her. She’s offended 
that Dussel doesn’t enter into her flirtations with him, as she’d 
hoped, afraid that her husband is smoking all the fur-coat 
money away, she quarrels, uses abusive language, cries, pities 
herself, laughs, and then starts a fresh quarrel again. What on 
earth can one do with such a foolish, blubbering specimen? 
No one takes her seriously, she hasn’t any character, and she 
grumbles to everyone. The worst of it is that it makes Peter 
rude, Mr. Van Daan irritable, and Mummy cynical. Yes, it’s a 
frightful situation! There’s one golden rale to keep before 
you: laugh about everything and don’t bother yourself about 
the others! It sounds selfish, but it’s honestly the only cure for 
anyone who has to seek consolation in himself. 

Kraler has received another call-up to go digging for four 
weeks. He’s trying to get out of it with a doctor’s certificate 
and a letter from the business. Koophuis wants to have an 
operation on his stomach. All private telephones were cut off 
at eleven o’clock yesterday. 

Yours, Anne