Sunday, 13 February, 1944

Dear Kitty, 

Since Saturday a lot has changed for me. It came about like 
this. I Ionged-and am still longing— but . . . now something 
has happened, which has made it a little, just a little, less. 

To my great joy— I will be quite honest about it— already 
this morning I noticed that Peter kept looking at me all the 
time. Not in the ordinary way, I don’t know how, I just can’t 
explain. 

I used to think that Peter was in love with Margot, but yesterday I suddenly had the feeling that it is not so. I made a 
special effort not to look at him too much, because whenever 
I did, he kept on looking too and then-yes, then-it gave me a 
lovely feeling inside, but which I mustn’t feel too often. 

I desperately want to be alone. Daddy has noticed that I’m 
not quite my usual self, but I really can’t tell him everything. 
“Leave me in peace, leave me alone,” that’s what I’d like to 

keep crying out all the time. Who knows, the day may come 
when I’m left alone more than I would wish! 

Yours, Anne 

Monday , 14 February , 1944 

Dear Kitty, 

On Sunday evening everyone except Pirn and me was sitting beside the wireless in order to listen to the ‘Immortal 
Music of the German Masters.” Dussel fiddled with the knobs 
continually. This annoyed Peter, and the others too. After restraining himself for half an hour, Peter asked somewhat irritably if the twisting and turning might stop. Dussel answered 
in his most hoity-toity manner, Tm getting it all right.” Peter 
became angry, was rude, Mr. Van Daan took his side, and 
Dussel had to give in. That was all. 

The reason in itself was very unimportant, but Peter seems 
to have taken it very much to heart. In any case, when I was 
rummaging about in the bookcase in the attic, he came up to 
me and began telhng me the whole story. I didn’t know anything about it, but Peter soon saw that he had found an attentive ear and got fairly into his stride. 

“Yes, and you see,” he said, “I don’t easily say anything, 
because I know beforehand that I’ll only become tongue-tied. 
I begin to stutter, blush, and twist around what I want to say, 
until I have to break off because I simply can’t find the words. 
That’s what happened yesterday, I wanted to say something 
quite different, but once I had started, I got m a hopeless 
muddle and that’s frightful. I used to have a bad habit; I wish 
I still had it now. If I was angry with anyone, rather than 
argue it out I would get to work on him with my fists. I quite 
realize that this method doesn’t get me anywhere; and that is 
why I admire you. You are never at a loss for a word, you say 
exactly what you want to say to people and are never the least 
bit shy.” 

“I can tell you, you’re making a big mistake,” I answered. 
“I usually say things quite differently from the way I meant to 


say them, and then I talk too much and far too long, and that’s 
just as bad.” 

I couldn’t help laughing to myself over this last sentence. 
However, I wanted to let him go on talking about himself, so 
I kept my amusement to myself, went and sat on a cushion on 
the floor, put my arms around my bent knees, and looked at 
him attentively. 

I am very glad that there is someone else in the house who 
can get into the same fits of rage as I get into I could see it 
did Peter good to pull Dussel to pieces to his heart’s content, 
without fear of my telling tales. And as for me, I was very 
pleased, because I sensed a real feeling of fellowship, such as 
I can only remember having had with my girl friends. 

Yours, Anne