Sunday, 21 June, 1942

Dear Kitty, 

Our whole class B1 is trembling, the reason is that the 
teachers’ meeting is to be held soon. There is much speculation
 as to who will move up and who will stay put. Miep de 
Jong and I are highly amused at Wim and Jacques, the two 
boys behind us. They won t have a florin left for the holidays, 
it will all be gone on betting. “You’ll move up,” “Shan’t,” 
“Shall,” from morning till night. Even Miep pleads for silence 
and my angry outbursts don’t calm them. 

According to me, a quarter of the class should stay where 
they are; there are some absolute cuckoos, but teachers are 
the greatest freaks on earth, so perhaps they will he freakish 
in the right way for once. 

I’m not afraid about my girl friends and myself, we’ll 
squeeze through somehow, though fro not too certain about 
my math. Still we can but wait patiently. Till then, we cheer 
each other along. 

I get along quite well with all my teachers, nine in all, 
seven masters and two mistresses. Mr. Keptor, the old math 
master, was very annoyed with me for a long time because I 
chatter so much. So I had to write a composition with “A Chatterbox”
as the subject. A chatterbox! Whatever could one 
write? However, deciding I would puzzle that out later, I 
wrote it in my notebook, and tried to keep quiet. 

That evening, when Td finished my other homework, my 
eyes fell on the title in my notebook. I pondered, while chewing the end of my fountain pen, that anyone can scribble some 
nonsense in large letters with the words well spaced but the 
difficulty was to prove beyond doubt the necessity of talking. 
I thought and thought and then, suddenly having an idea, 
filled my three allotted sides and felt completely satisfied. My 
arguments were that talking is a feminine characteristic and 
that I would do my best to keep it under control, but I should 
never be cured, for my mother talked as much as I, probably 
more, and what can one do about inherited qualities? Mr. 
Keptor had to laugh at my arguments, but when I continued 
to hold forth in the next lesson, another composition followed. 
This time it was ‘Incurable Chatterbox,” I handed this in and 
Keptor made no complaints for two whole lessons. But in the 
third lesson it was too much for him again. “Anne, as punishment
 for talking, will do a composition entitled ‘Quack, quack, 
quack, says Mrs. Natterbeak.’ ” Shouts of laughter from the 
class. I had to laugh too, although I felt that my inventiveness 
on this subject was exhausted. I had to think of something 
else, something entirely original. I was in luck, as my friend 
Sanne writes good poetry and offered to help by doing the 
whole composition in verse. I jumped for joy. Keptor wanted 
to make a fool of me with this absurd theme, I would get my 
own back and make him the laughing-stock of the whole class 
The poem was finished and was perfect. It was about a mother 
duck and a father swan who had three baby ducklings. The 
baby ducklings were bitten to death by Father because they 
chattered too much. Luckily Keptor saw the joke, he read the 
poem out loud to the class, with comments, and also to various other classes. 

Since then I am allowed to talk, never get extra work, in 
fact Keptor always jokes about it. 

Yours, Anne