Friday , 19 March, 1943

Dear Kitty, 

An hour later joy was followed by disappointment. Turkey 
is not in the war yet. It was only a cabinet minister talking 
about them soon giving up their neutrality. A newspaper in 
the Dam 1 was crying, “Turkey on England's side." The newspapers were tom out of his hands. This is how the joyful news 

a A square in front of the Royal Palace. 


reached us too; 500- and 1000-guilder notes have been declared no longer valid. It is a trap for black marketeers and 
suchlike, but even more for people who have got other kinds 
of “black” money, and for people in hiding. If you wish to 
hand in a 1000-guilder note you must be able to declare, and 
prove, exactly how you got it. They may still be used to pay 
taxes, but only until next week. Dussel has received an oldfashioned foot-operated dentist's drill, I expect he’ll soon give 
me a thorough check-over. The "Fiihrer aller Germanen” has 
been talking to wounded soldiers. Listening-in to it was pitiful. Question and answer went something like this: 

"My name is Heinrich Scheppel.” 

"Wounded where?” 

“Near Stalingrad.” 

"What kind of wound?” 

"Two feet frozen off and a broken joint in the left arm.” 

This is exactly what the frightful puppet show on the radio 
was like. The wounded seemed to be proud of their wounds 
-the more the better. One of them felt so moved at being able 
to shake hands with the Fiihrer (that is, if he still had a 
handl) that he could hardly get the words out of his mouth. 

Yours, Anne 

Thursday , 25 March , 1943 

Dear Kitty, 

Yesterday Mummy, Daddy, Margot, and I were sitting 
pleasantly together when suddenly Peter came in and whispered something in Daddy’s ear. I heard something about "a 
barrel fallen over in the warehouse” and "someone fumbling 
about at the door.” Margot had heard it too; but when Daddy 
and Peter went off immediately, she tried to calm me down a 
bit, because I was naturally as white as a sheet and very jittery. 

The three of us waited in suspense. A minute or two later 
Mrs. Van Daan came upstairs, she’d been listening to the 

wireless in the private office. She told us that Pim had asked 
her to turn off the wireless and go softly upstairs. But you 
know what that's like, if you want to be extra quiet, then each 
step of the old stairs creaks twice as loudly. Five minutes later 
Pim and Peter appeared again, white to the roots of their hair, 
and told us their experiences. 

They had hidden themselves under the stairs and waited, 
with no result at first. But suddenly, yes, I must tell you, they 
heard two loud bumps, just as if two doors were banged here 
in the house. Pim was upstairs in one leap. Peter warned Dussel first, who finally landed upstairs with a lot of fuss and 
noise. Then we all went up in stockinged feet to the Van 
Daans on the next floor. Mr. Van Daan had a bad cold and 
had already gone to bed, so we all drew up closely around his 
bed and whispered our suspicions to him. 

Each time Mr. Van Daan coughed loudly, Mrs. Van Daan 
and I were so scared that we thought we were going to have a 
fit. That went on until one of us got the bright idea of giving 
him some codeine, which soothed the cough at once. Again 
we waited and waited, but we heard no more and finally we 
all came to the conclusion that the thieves had taken to their 
heels when they heard footsteps in the house, which was 
otherwise so silent. 

Now it was unfortunate that the wireless downstairs was 
still tuned to England, and that the chairs were neatly arranged round it. If the door had been forced, and the air-raid 
wardens had noticed and warned the police, then the results 
might have been very unpleasant. So Mr. Van Daan got up 
and put on his coat and hat and followed Daddy cautiously 
downstairs, Peter took up the rear, armed with a large hammer in case of emergencies. The ladies upstairs (including 
Margot and me) waited in suspense, until the gentlemen reappeared five minutes later and told us that all was quiet in the 
house. 

We arranged that we would not draw any water or pull the 
plug in the lavatory. But as the excitement had affected most 
of our tummies, you can imagine what the atmosphere was 
like when we had each paid a visit in succession. 

ANNE FRANK 

When something like that happens, heaps of other things 
seem to come at the same time, as now. Number One was that 
the clock at the Westertoren, which I always find so reassuring, did not strike. Number Two was that, Mr. Vossen having 
left earlier than usual the previous evening, we didn’t know 
definitely whether Elli had been able to get hold of the key, 
and had perhaps forgotten to shut the door. It was still evening and we were still in a state of uncertainty, although we 
certainly did feel a bit reassured by the fact that from about 
eight o’clock, when the burglar had alarmed the house, until 
half past ten we had not heard a sound. On further reflection 
it also seemed very unlikely to us that a thief would have 
forced open a door so early in the evening, while there were 
still people about in the street. Moreover, one of us got the 
idea that it was possible that the caretaker of the warehouse 
next door was still at work since, in the excitement, and with 
the thin walls, one can easily make a mistake, and what’s 
more, one’s imagination can play a big part at such critical 
moments. 

So we all went to bed; but none of us could get to sleep. 
Daddy as well as Mummy and Mr. Dussel were awake, and 
without much exaggeration I can say that I hardly slept a 
wink. This morning the men went downstairs to see whether 
the outside door was still shut, and everything turned out to 
be quite safe. We gave everyone a detailed description of the 
nerve-racking event. They all made fun of it, but it is easy to 
laugh at such things afterwards. Elh was the only one who 
took us seriously. 

Yours, Anne 

Saturday , 27 March , 194S 

Dear Kitty, 

We have finished our shorthand course; now we are beginning to practice speed. Aren’t we getting clever? I must tell 
you more about my time-killing subjects (I call them such, because we have got nothing else to do but make the days go by 



as quickly as possible, so that the end of our time here comes 
more quickly); I’m mad on Mythology and especially the 
Gods of Greece and Rome. They think here that it is just a 
passing craze, they’ve never heard of an adolescent kid of my 
age being interested in Mythology. Well, then, I shall be the 
first! 

Mr. Van Daan has a cold, or rather he has a little tickle in 
his throat. He makes a tremendous fuss about it Gargling 
with camomile tea, painting his throat with tincture of myrrh, 
rubbing eucalyptus all over his chest, nose, teeth, and tongue; 
and then getting into an evil mood on top of it all. 

Rauter, one of the German big shots, has made a speech. 
“All Jews must be out of the German-occupied countries before July 1. Between April 1 and May 1 the province of 
Utrecht must be cleaned out [as if the Jews were cockroaches]. Between May 1 and June 1 the provinces of North 
and South Holland.” These wretched people are sent to filthy 
slaughterhouses like a herd of sick, neglected cattle. But I 
won’t talk about it, I only get nightmares from such thoughts. 

One good little piece of news is that the German department of the Labor Exchange has been set on fire by saboteurs. A few days after, the Registrar’s Office went the same 
way. Men in German police uniforms gagged the guards and 
managed to destroy important papers. 

Yours, Anne 

Thursday , 1 April , 1943 

Dear Kitty, 

I’m really not April-fooling (see the date), but the opposite; 
today I can easily quote the saying. “Misfortunes never come 
singly.” To begin with, Mr. Koophuis, the one who always 
cheers us up, has had hemorrhage of the stomach and has got 
to stay in bed for at least three weeks. Secondly, Elli has flu. 
Thirdly, Mr. Vossen is going to the hospital next week. He 
has probably got an abdominal ulcer. And fourthly, some important business conferences, the mam points of which Daddy 


had discussed in detail with Mr. Koophuis, were due to be 
held, but now there isn't time to explain everything thoroughly to Mr. Kraler. 

The gentlemen who had been expected duly arrived; even 
before they came Daddy was trembling with anxiety as to 
how the talks would go. "If only I could be there, if only I was 
downstairs," he cried. "Why don't you go and lie with one ear 
pressed against the floor, then you'll be able to hear everything." Daddy's face cleared, and at half past ten yesterday 
morning Margot and Pim (two ears are better than one!) took 
up their positions on the floor. The talks were not finished in 
the morning, but by the afternoon Daddy was not in a fit state 
to continue the listening campaign. He was half paralyzed 
from remaining in so unusual and uncomfortable a position. I 
took his place at half past two, as soon as we heard voices in 
the passage. Margot kept me company. The talk at times was 
so long-winded and boring that quite suddenly I fell asleep on 
the cold hard linoleum floor. Margot did not dare to touch me 
for fear they might hear us, and talking was out of the question. I slept for a good half hour and then woke with a shock, 
having forgotten every word of the important discussions. 
Luckily Margot had paid more attention. 

Yours, Anne 

Friday , 2 April , 1943 

Dear Kitty, 

Oh dear: I've got another terrible black mark against my 
name. I was lying in bed yesterday evening waiting for Daddy 
to come and say my prayers with me, and wish me good night, 
when Mummy came into my room, sat on my bed, and asked 
very nicely, "Anne, Daddy can’t come yet, shall I say your 
prayers with you tonight?" "No, Mummy,” I answered. 

Mummy got up, paused by my bed for a moment, and 
walked slowly towards the door. Suddenly she turned around, 
and with a distorted look on her face said, "I don't want to 

be cross, love cannot be forced.” There were tears in her eyes 
as she left the room. 

I lay still in bed, feeling at once that I had been horrible to 
push her away so rudely. But I knew too that I couldn't have 
answered differently. It simply wouldn't work. I felt sorry for 
Mummy; very, very sorry, because I had seen for the first time 
in my life that she mmds my coldness. I saw the look of sorrow on her face when she spoke of love not being forced. It is 
hard to speak the truth, and yet it is the truth: she herself has 
pushed me away, her tactless remarks and her crude jokes, 
which I don't find at all funny, have now made me insensitive 
to any love from her side. Just as I shrink at her hard words, 
so did her heart when she realized that the love between us 
was gone. She cried half the night and hardly slept at all. 
Daddy doesn't look at me and if he does for a second, then I 
read in his eyes the words: "How can you be so unkind, how 
can you bring yourself to cause your mother such sorrow?” 

They expect me to apologize; but this is something I can't 
apologize for because I spoke the truth and Mummy will have 
to know it sooner or later anyway. I seem, and indeed am, indifferent both to Mummy’s tears and Daddy's looks, because 
for the first time they are both aware of something which I 
have always felt. I can only feel sorry for Mummy, who has 
now had to discover that I have adopted her own attitude. For 
myself, I remain silent and aloof; and I shall not shrink from 
the truth any longer, because the longer it is put off, the more 
difficult it will be for them when they do hear it. 

Yours, Anne 

Tuesday , 27 April , 1943 

Dear Kitty, 

Such quarrels that the whole house thunders! Mummy and 
I, the Van Daans and Daddy, Mummy and Mrs. Van Daan, 
everyone is angry with everyone else. Nice atmosphere, isn't 
it? Anne's usual list of failings has been brought out again and 
fully ventilated. 


Mr. Vossen is already in the Binnengasthuis hospital. Mr. 
Koophuis is up again, the hemorrhage having stopped sooner 
than usual. He told us that the Registrar's Office received additional damage from the Fire Service who, instead of just 
quenching the flames, soaked the whole place with water. Im 
glad! 

The Carlton Hotel is smashed to bits. Two British planes 
loaded with incendiary bombs fell right on top of the “Offiziersheim/ 71 The whole Vijzelstraat-Singei comer is burned 
down. The air raids on German towns are growing in strength 
every day. We don't have a single quiet night. Tve got dark 
rings under my eyes from lack of sleep. Our food is miserable. 
Dry bread and coffee substitute for breakfast. Dinner: spinach 
or lettuce for a fortnight on end. Potatoes twenty centimeters 
long and tasting sweet and rotten. Whoever wants to follow a 
slimming course should stay in the "Secret Annexe"! They 
complain bitterly upstairs, but we don't regard it as such a 
tragedy. All the men who fought in 1940 or were mobilized 
have been called up to work for "der Fiihrer" as prisoners of 
war. Suppose they’re doing that as a precaution against invasion. 

Yours, Anne 

Saturday , I May , 1943 

Dear Kitty, 

If I just thin k of how we live here, I usually come to the 
conclusion that it is a paradise compared with how other Jews 
who are not in hiding must be living. Even so, later on, when 
everything is normal again, I shall be amazed to think that we, 
who were so spick and span at home, should have sunk to such 
a low level. By this I mean that our manners have declined. 
For instance, ever since we have been here, we have had one 
oilcloth on our table which, owing to so much use, is not one 
of the cleanest. Admittedly I often try to clean it with a dirty 
dishcloth, which is more hole than cloth. The table doesn't do 

1 Gennaa Officers* Club. 



us much credit either, in spite of hard scrubbing. The Van 
Daans have been sleeping on the same flannelette sheet the 
whole winter; one can t wash it here because the soap powder 
we get on the ration isn't sufficient, and besides it’s not good 
enough. Daddy goes about in frayed trousers and his tie is beginning to show signs of wear too. Mummy's corsets have split 
today and are too old to be repaired, while Margot goes about 
in a brassiere two sizes too small for her. 

Mummy and Margot have managed the whole winter with 
three vests between them, and mine are so small that they 
don’t even reach my tummy. 

Certainly, these are all things which can be overcome. Still, 
I sometimes realize with a shock: “How are we, now going 
about in worn-out things, from my pants down to Daddy’s 
shaving brush, ever going to get back to our prewar standards?” 

They were banging away so much last night that four times 
I gathered all my belongings together. Today I have packed a 
suitcase with the most necessary things for an escape. But 
Mummy quite rightly says: “Where will you escape to?” The 
whole of Holland is being punished for the strikes which have 
been going on in many parts of the country. Therefore a state 
of siege has been declared and everyone gets one butter 
coupon less. What naughty little children! 

Yours, Anne 

Tuesday , 18 May , 1943 

Dear Kitty, 

I witnessed a terrific air battle between German and British 
planes. Unfortunately a couple of the Allies had to jump from 
burning machines. Our milkman, who lives in Halfweg, saw 
four Canadians sitting by the roadside, one of them spoke 
fluent Dutch. He asked the milkman to give him a light for his 
cigarette, and told him that the crew had consisted of six men. 
The pilot was burned to death, and their fifth man had hidden himself somewhere. The German police came and fetched 

ANNE FRANK 72 

the four perfectly fit men. I wonder how they managed to 
have such clear brains after that terrifying parachute trip. 

Although it is fairly warm, we have to light our fires every 
other day, in order to bum vegetable peelings and refuse. We 
can't put anything in the garbage pails, because we must always think of the warehouse boy. How easily one could be 
betrayed by being a little careless! 

All students who wish either to get their degrees this year, 
or continue their studies, are compelled to sign that they are 
in sympathy with the Germans and approve of the New Order. 
Eighty per cent have refused to go against their consciences. 
Naturally they had to bear the consequences. All the students 
who do not sign have to go to a labor camp in Germany What 
will be left of the youth of the country if they have all got to 
do hard labor in Germany? Mummy shut the window last 
night because of all the banging; I was in Pirn's bed Suddenly 
Mrs. Van Daan jumped out of bed above us, just as if Mouschi 
had bitten her. A loud clap followed immediately. It sounded 
just as if an incendiary bomb had fallen beside my bed. I 
shrieked out, “Light, light 5 ” Pirn turned on the lamp. I expected nothing less than to see the room ablaze within a few 
minutes. Nothing happened. We all hurried upstairs to see 
what was going on. Mr. and Mrs. Van Daan had seen a red 
glow through the open window. He thought that there was a 
fire in the neighborhood and she thought that our house had 
caught fire. When the clap came Mrs. Van Daan was already 
on her feet with her knees knocking. But nothing more happened and we all crept back into our beds. 

Before a quarter of an hour had passed the shooting started 
up again. Mrs. Van Daan sat bolt upright at once and then 
went downstairs to Mr. Dussel's room, seeking there the rest 
which she could not find with her spouse. Dussel received her 
with the words, “Come into my bed, my child!” which sent us 
off into uncontrollable laughter. The gunfire troubled us no 
longer, our fear was banished! 

Yours, Anne