Wednesday , 22 December, 1943

Dear Kitty, 

A bad attack of flu has prevented me from writing to you 
until today. It’s wretched to be ill here. When I wanted to 
cough-one, two, three— I crawled under the blankets and 
tried to stifle the noise. Usually the only result was that the 
tickle wouldn’t go away at all; and milk: and honey, sugar or 
lozenges had to be brought into operation. It makes me dizzy 
to think of all the cures that were tried on me. Sweating, compresses, wet cloths on my chest, dry cloths on my chest, hot 
drinks, gargling, throat painting, lying still, cushion for extra 
warmth, hot-water bottles, lemon squashes, and, in addition, 
the thermometer every two hours! 

Can anyone really get better like this? The worst moment 
of all was certainly when Mr. Dussel thought he’d play doctor, 
and came and lay on my naked chest with his greasy head, in 
order to listen to the sounds within. Not only did his hair tickle 
unbearably, but I was embarrassed, in spite of the fact that he 
once, thirty years ago, studied medicine and has the title of 
Doctor. Why should the fellow come and lie on my heart? 
He’s not my lover, after all! For that matter, he wouldn’t hear 
whether it’s healthy or unhealthy inside me anyway; his ears 
need syringing first, as he’s becoming alarmingly hard of 
hearing. 

But that is enough about illness. I’m as fit as a fiddle again, 

THE DIARY OF A YOUNG GIRL 109 

one centimeter taller, two pounds Heavier, pale, and with a 
real appetite for learning. 

There is not much news to tell you. We are all getting on 
well together for a change! There's no quarreling—we haven’t 
had such peace in the home for at least half a year. Elli is 
still parted from us. 

We received extra oil for Christmas, sweets and syrup; the 
“chief present” is a brooch, made out of a two-and-a-half-cent 
piece, and shining beautifully. Anyway, lovely, but indescribable. Mr. Dussel gave Mummy and Mrs. Van Daan a lovely 
cake which he had asked Miep to bake for him. With all her 
work, she has to do that as well! I have also something for 
Miep and Elli. For at least two months I have saved the sugar 
from my porridge, you see, and with Mr. Koophuis’s help I’ll 
have it made into fondants. 

It is drizzly weather, the stove smells, the food lies heavily 
on everybody’s tummy, causing thunderous noises on all sides! 
The war at a standstill, morale rotten. 

Yours, Anne 

Friday , 24 December , 1943 

Dear Kitty, 

I have previously written about how much we are affected 
by atmospheres here, and I think that in my own case this 
trouble is getting much worse lately. 

“Himmelhoch jauchzend und zum Tode betriiht” 1 certainly 
fits here. I am “Himmelhoch jauchzend” if I only think how 
lucky we are here compared with other Jewish children, and 
“zum Tode betrubf comes over me when, as happened today, 
for example, Mrs. Koophuis comes and tells us about her 
daughter Corry’s hockey club, canoe trips, theatrical performances, and friends. I don’t think I’m jealous of Corry, but 
I couldn’t help feeling a great longing to have lots of fun myself for once, and to laugh until my tummy ached. Especially 

X A famous line from Goethe: “On top of the world, or in the depths of 
despair.” 


at this time of the year with all the holidays for Christmas and 
the New Year, and we are stuck here like outcasts. Still, I really ought not to write this, because it seems ungrateful and I’ve 
certainly been exaggerating. But still, whatever you think of 
me, I can’t keep everything to myself, so I’ll remind you of 
my opening words— “Paper is patient.” 

When someone comes in from outside, with the wind in 
their clothes and the cold on their faces, then I could bury my 
head in the blankets to stop myself thinking: “When will we 
be granted the privilege of smelling fresh air?” And because I 
must not bury my head in the blankets, but the reverse— I 
must keep my head high and be brave, the thoughts will 
come, not once, but oh, countless times. Believe me, if you 
have been shut up for a year and a half, it can get too much 
for you some days. In spite of all justice and thankfulness, you 
can’t crush your feelings. Cycling, dancing, whistling, looking 
out into the world, feeling young, to know that I’m free— 
that’s what I long for; still, I mustn’t show if, because I sometimes think if all eight of us began to pity ourselves, or went 
about with discontented faces, where would it lead us? I 
sometimes ask myself, “Would anyone, either Jew or non-Jew, 
understand this about me, that I am simply a young girl badly 
in need of some rollicking fun?” I don’t know, and I couldn’t 
talk about it to anyone, because then I know I should cry. 
Crying can bring such relief. 

In spite of all my theories, and however much trouble I 
take, each day I miss having a real mother who understands 
me. That is why with everything I do and write I think of the 
“Mumsie” that I want to be for my children later on. The 
“Mumsie” who doesn’t take everything that is said in general 
conversation so seriously, but who does take what 1 say seriously. I have noticed, though I can’t explain how, that the 
word “Mumsie” tells you everything. Do you know what I’ve 
found? To give me the feeling of calling Mummy something 
which sounds like “Mumsie” I often call her “Mum”; then 
from that comes “Mums”: the incomplete “Mumsie,” as it 
were, whom I would so love to honor with the extra “ie” and 

yet who does not realize it It’s a good thing, because it would 
only make her unhappy. 

That’s enough about that, writing has made my “zum Tode 
hetrubf go off a bit. 

Yours, Anne 

Saturday, 25 December , 1943 

Dear Kitty, 

During these days, now that Christmas is here, I find myself 
thinking all the time about Km, and what he told me about 
the love of his youth. Last year I didn’t understand the meaning of his words as well as I do now. If he’d only talk about it 
again, perhaps I would be able to show him that I understand. 

I believe that Pirn talked about it because he who “knows 
the secrets of so many other hearts” had to express his own 
feelings for once; because otherwise Pirn never says a word 
about himself, and I don’t think Margot has any idea of all 
Pirn has had to go through. Poor Pirn, he can’t make me think 
that he has forgotten everything. He will never forget this. He 
has become very tolerant. I hope that I shall grow a bit like 
him, without having to go through all that. 

Yours, Anne 

Monday , 27 December , 1943 

Dear Kitty, 

On Friday evening for the first time in my life I received 
something for Christmas. Koophuis, Kraler and the girls had 
prepared a lovely surprise again. Miep has made a lovely 
Christmas cake, on which was written “Peaee 1944.” Elli had 
provided a pound of sweet biscuits of prewar quality. For 
Peter, Margot, and me a bottle of yoghourt, and a bottle of 
beer for each of the grownups. Everything was so nicely done 
up, and there were pictures stuck on the different packages. 
Otherwise Christmas passed by quickly for us. 

Yours, Anne 


Wednesday , 29 December , 1943 

Dear Kitty, 

I was very unhappy again last evening. Granny and Lies 
came into my mind. Granny, oh, darling Granny, how little 
we understood of what she suffered, or how sweet she was. 
And besides all this, she knew a terrible secret which she 
carefully kept to herself the whole time . 1 How faithful and 
good Granny always was; she would never have let one of us 
down. Whatever it was, however naughty I had been, Granny 
always stuck up for me. 

Granny, did you love me or didn’t you understand me 
either? I don’t know. No one ever talked about themselves to 
Granny. How lonely Granny must have been, how lonely in 
spite of us! A person can be lonely even if he is loved by many 
people, because he is still not the “One and Only” to anyone. 

And Lies, is she still alive? What is she doing? Oh, God, 
protect her and bring her back to us. Lies, I see in you all the 
time what my lot might have been, I keep seeing myself in 
your place. Why then should I often be unhappy over what 
happens here? Shouldn’t I always be glad, contented, and 
happy, except when I think about her and her companions in 
distress? I am selfish and cowardly. Why do I always dream 
and think of the most terrible things-my fear makes me want 
to scream out loud sometimes. Because still, in spite of everything, I have not enough faith in God. He has given me so 
much-which I certainly do not deserve-and I still do so much 
that is wrong every day. If you think of your fellow creatures, 
then you only want to cry, you could really cry the whole day 
long. The only thing to do is to pray that God will perform a 
miracle and save some of them. And I hope that I am doing 
that enough. 

Yours, Anne 

Sunday, 2 January , 1944 

Dear Kitty, 

This morning when I had nothing to do I turned over some 
of the pages of my diary and several times I came across letters dealing with the subject “Mummy” in such a hotheaded 
way that I was quite shocked, and asked myself: “Anne, is it 
really you who mentioned hate? Oh, Anne, how could youl” 
I remained sitting with the open page in my hand, and 
thought about it and how it came about that I should have 
been so brimful of rage and really so filled with such a thing 
as hate that I had to confide it all in you. I have been trying 
to understand the Anne of a year ago and to excuse her, because my conscience isn’t clear as long as I leave you with 
these accusations, without being able to explain, on looking 
back, how it happened. 

I suffer now— and suffered then-from moods which kept my 
head under water (so to speak) and only allowed me to see 
the things subjectively without enabling me to consider quietly the words of the other side, and to answer them as the 
words of one whom I, with my hotheaded temperament, had 
offended or made unhappy. 

I hid myself within myself, I only considered myself and 
quietly wrote down all my joys, sorrows, and contempt in my 
diary. This diary is of great value to me, because it has become a book of memoirs in many places, but on a good many 
pages I could certainly put “past and done with ” 

I used to be furious with Mummy, and still am sometimes. 
It’s true that she doesn’t understand me, but I don’t understand her either. She did love me very much and she was 
tender, but as she landed in so many unpleasant situations 
through me, and was nervous and irritable because of other 
worries and difficulties, it is certainly understandable that she 
snapped at me. 

I took it much too seriously, was offended, and was rude 
and aggravating to Mummy, which, in turn, made her unhappy. So it was really a matter of unpleasantness and misery 


rebounding all the time. It wasn't nice for either of us, but it is 
passing. 

I just didn't want to see all this, and pitied myself very 
much; but that, too, is understandable. Those violent outbursts on paper were only giving vent to anger which in a 
normal life could have been worked off by stamping my feet 
a couple of times in a locked room, or calling Mummy names 
behind her back. 

The period when I caused Mummy to shed tears is over. I 
have grown wiser and Mummy's nerves are not so much on 
edge. I usually keep my mouth shut if I get annoyed, and so 
does she, so we appear to get on much better together. I can’t 
really love Mummy in a dependent childlike way—I just don’t 
have that feeling. 

I soothe my conscience now with the thought that it is better for hard words to be on paper than that Mummy should 
carry them in her heart. 

Yours, Anne 

Wednesday , 5 January , 1944 

Dear Kitty, 

I have two things to confess to you today, which will take a 
long time. But I must tell someone and you are the best one 
to tell, as I know that, come what may, you always keep a 
secret. 

The first is about Mummy. You know that I've grumbled a 
lot about Mummy, yet still tried to be nice to her again. Now 
it is suddenly clear to me what she lacks. Mummy herself has 
told us that she looked upon us more as her friends than her 
daughters. Now that is all very fine, but still, a friend can't 
take a mother's place. I need my mother as an example which 
I can follow, I want to be able to respect her. I have the feeling that Margot thinks differently about these things and 
would never be able to understand what I've just told you. 
And Daddy avoids all arguments about Mummy. 

I imagine a mother as a woman who, in the first place, 

THE DIARY OF A YOUNG GIRL 115 

shows great tact, especially towards her children when they 
reach our age, and who does not laugh at me if I cry about 
something-not pain, but other things-like “Mums” does. 

One thing, which perhaps may seem rather fatuous, I have 
never forgiven her. It was on a day that I had to go to the 
dentist. Mummy and Margot were going to come with me, 
and agreed that I should take my bicycle. When we had finished at the dentist, and were outside again, Margot and 
Mummy told me that they were going into the town to look 
at something or buy something— I don't remember exactly 
what. I wanted to go, too, but was not allowed to, as I had 
my bicycle with me. Tears of rage sprang into my eyes, and 
Mummy and Margot began laughing at me. Then I became 
so furious that I stuck my tongue out at them in the street just 
as an old woman happened to pass by, who looked very 
shocked! I rode home on my bicycle, and I know I cried for a 
long time. 

It is queer that the wound that Mummy made then still 
bums, when I think of how angry I was that afternoon. 

The second is something that is very difficult to tell you, 
because it is about myself. 

Yesterday I read an article about blushing by Sis Heyster. 
This article might have been addressed to me personally. Although I don't blush very easily, the other things in it certainly all fit me. She writes roughly something like this— that a girl 
in the years of puberty becomes quiet within and begins to 
think about the wonders that are happening to her body. 

I experience that, too, and that is why I get the feeling lately of being embarrassed about Margot, Mummy, and Daddy. 
Funnily enough, Margot, who is much more shy than I am, 
isn't at all embarrassed. 

I think what is happening to me is so wonderful, and not 
only what can be seen on my body, but all that is taking place 
inside. I never discuss myself or any of these things with anybody; that is why I have to talk to myself about them. 

Each time I have a period— and that has only been three 
times-I have the feeling that in spite of all the pain, unpleasantness, and nastiness, I have a sweet secret, and that is 


why, although it is nothing but a nuisance to me in a way, I 
always long for the time that I shall feel that secret within me 
again. 

Sis Heyster also writes that girls of this age don't feel quite 
certain of themselves, and discover that they themselves are 
individuals with ideas, thoughts, and habits. After I came 
here, when I was just fourteen, I began to think about myself 
sooner than most girls, and to know that I am a “person.” 
Sometimes, when I lie in bed at night, I have a terrible desire 
to feel my breasts and to listen to the quiet rhythmic beat of 
my heart. 

I already had these kinds of feelings subconsciously before 
I came here, because I remember that once when I slept with 
a girl friend I had a strong desire to kiss her, and that I did 
do so. I could not help being terribly inquisitive over her 
body, for she had always kept it hidden from me. I asked her 
whether, as a proof of our friendship, we should feel one another's breasts, but she refused. I go into ecstasies every time 
I see the naked figure of a woman, such as Venus, for example. 
It strikes me as so wonderful and exquisite that I have difficulty in stopping the tears rolling down my cheeks. 

If only I had a girl friend! 

Yours, Anne 

Thursday , 6 January , 1944 

Dear Kitty, 

My longing to talk to someone became so intense that somehow or other I took it into my head to choose Peter. 

Sometimes if I’ve been upstairs into Peter s room during the 
day, it always struck me as very snug, but because Peter is so 
retiring and would never turn anyone out who became a 
nuisance, I never dared stay long, because I was afraid he 
might think me a bore. I tried to think of an excuse to stay in 
his room and get him talking, without it being too noticeable, 
and my chance came yesterday. Peter has a mania for crossword puzzles at the moment and hardly does anything else. I 

THE DIARY OF A YOUNG GIRL 117 

helped him with them and we soon sat opposite each other at 
his little table, he on the chair and me on the divan. 

It gave me a queer feeling each time I looked into his deep 
blue eyes, and he sat there with that mysterious laugh playing 
round his lips. I was able to read his inward thoughts. I could 
see on his face that look of helplessness and uncertainty as to 
how to behave, and, at the same time, a trace of his sense of 
manhood. I noticed his shy maimer and it made me feel very 
gentle; I couldn’t refrain from meeting those dark eyes again 
and again, and with my whole heart I almost beseeched him: 
oh, tell me, what is going on inside you, oh, can’t you look 
beyond this ridiculous chatter? 

But the evening passed and nothing happened, except that 
I told him about blushing-naturally not what I have written, 
but just so that he would become more sure of himself as he 
grew older. 

When I lay in bed and thought over the whole situation, 
I found it far from encouraging, and the idea that I should 
beg for Peter’s patronage was simply repellent. One can do a 
lot to satisfy one’s longings, which certainly sticks out in my 
case, for I have made up my mind to go and sit with Peter 
more often and to get him talking somehow or other. 

Whatever you do, don’t think I’m in love with Peter— not a 
bit of it! If die Van Daans had had a daughter instead of a 
son, I should have tried to make friends with her too. 

I woke at about five to seven this morning and knew at 
once, quite positively, what I had dreamed. I sat on a chair 
and opposite me sat Peter . . . Wessel. We were looking together at a book of drawings by Mary Bos. The dream was so 
vivid that I can still partly remember the drawings. But that 
was not all-the dream went on. Suddenly Peter’s eyes met 
mine and I looked into those fine, velvet brown eyes for a long 
time. Then Peter said very softly, “If I had only known, I 
would have come to you long before!” I turned around 
brusquely because the emotion was too much for me. And 
after that I felt a soft, and oh, such a cool kind cheek against 
mine and it felt so good, so good. . , , 

I awoke at this point, while I could still feel his cheek 


against mine and felt his brown eyes looking deep into my 
heart, so deep, that there he read how much I had loved him 
and how much I still love him. Tears sprang into my eyes once 
more, and I was very sad that I had lost him again, but at the 
same time glad because it made me feel quite certain that 
Peter was still the chosen one. 

It is strange that I should often see such vivid images in 
my dreams here. First I saw Grandma 1 so clearly one night 
that I could even distinguish her thick, soft, wrinkled velvety 
skin. Then Granny appeared as a guardian angel; then followed Lies, who seems to be a symbol to me of the sufferings 
of all my girl friends and all Jews. When I pray for her, I pray 
for all Jews and all those in need. And now Peter, my darling 
Peter— never before have I had such a clear picture of him in 
my mind. I don't need a photo of him, I can see him before 
my eyes, and oh, so welll 

Yours, Anne