Wednesday, 12 January, 1944

Dear Kitty, 

Elli has been back a fortnight. Miep and Henk were away 
from their work for two days— they both had tummy upsets. 

I have a craze for dancing and ballet at the moment, and 

practice dance steps every evening diligently. I Lave made a 
supermodern dance frock from a light blue petticoat edged 
with lace belonging to Mansa. A ribbon is threaded through 
round the top and ties in a bow in the center, and a pink 
corded ribbon completes the creation. I tried in vain to convert my gym shoes into real ballet shoes. My stiff limbs are 
well on the way to becoming supple again like they used to 
be. One terrific exercise is to sit on the floor, hold a heel in 
each hand, and then lift both legs up in the air. I have to 
have a cushion under me, otherwise my poor little behind has 
a rough time. 

Everyone here is reading the book Cloudless Morn. Mummy 
thought it exceptionally good; there are a lot of youth problems in it. I thought to myself rather ironically: “Take a bit 
more trouble with your own young people first!” 

I believe Mummy thinks there could be no better relationship between parents and their children, and that no one 
could take a greater interest in their children s lives than she. 
But quite definitely she only looks at Margot, who I don't 
think ever had such problems and thoughts as I do. Still, I 
wouldn’t dream of pointing out to Mummy that, in the case 
of her daughters, it isn’t at all as she imagines, because she 
would be utterly amazed and wouldn’t know how to change 
anyway; I want to save her the unhappiness it would cause 
her, especially as I know that for me everything would remain 
the same anyway. 

Mummy certainly feels that Margot loves her much more 
than I do, but she thinks that this just goes in phases! Margot 
has grown so sweet; she seems quite different from what she 
used to be, isn’t nearly so catty these days and is becoming a 
real friend. Nor does she any longer regard me as a little kid 
who counts for nothing. 

I have an odd way of sometimes, as it were, being able to 
see myself through someone else’s eyes. Then I view the affairs 
of a certain “Anne” at my ease, and browse through the pages 
of her life as if she were a stranger. Before we came here, 
when I didn’t think about things as much as I do now, I used 
at times to have the feeling that I didn’t belong to Mansa, 


Pim, and Margot, and that I would always be a bit of an outsider. Sometimes I used to pretend I was an orphan, until I 
reproached and punished myself, telling myself it was all my 
own fault that I played this self-pitying role, when I was really so fortunate. Then came the time that I used to force myself to be friendly. Every morning, as soon as someone came 
downstairs I hoped that it would be Mummy who would say 
good morning to me; I greeted her warmly, because I really 
longed for her to look lovingly at me. Then she made some remark or other that seemed unfriendly, and I would go off to 
school again feeling thoroughly disheartened. On the way 
home I would make excuses for her because she had so many 
worries, arrive home very cheerful, chatter nineteen to the 
dozen, until I began repeating myself, and left the room wearing a pensive expression, my satchel under my arm. Sometimes I decided to remain cross, but when I came home from 
school I always had so much news that my resolutions were 
gone with the wind and Mummy, whatever she might be doing, had to lend an ear to all my adventures. Then the time 
came once more when I didn’t listen for footsteps on the staircase any longer, and at night my pillow was wet with tears. 

Everything grew much worse at that point; enfin, you know 
all about it. 

Now God has sent me a helper— Peter ... I just clasp my 
pendant, kiss it, and think to myself, “What do I care about 
the lot of them! Peter belongs to me and no one knows anything about it.” This way I can get over all the snubs I receive. Who would ever think that so much can go on in the 
soul of a young girl? 

Yours, Anne