Tuesday, 20 October, 1942

Dear Kitty, 

My hand still shakes, although it’s two hours since we 
had the shock. I should explain that there are five fire
extinguishers in the house. We knew that someone was coming 
to fill them, but no one had warned us when the carpenter, 
or whatever you call him, was coming. 

The result was that we weren’t making any attempt to 
keep quiet, until I heard hammering outside on the landing 
opposite our cupboard door. I thought of the carpenter at 
once and warned Elli, who was having a meal with us, that 
she shouldn’t go downstairs. Daddy and I posted ourselves 
at the door so as to hear when the man left. After he d been 
working for a quarter of an hour, he laid his hammer and 
tools down on top of our cupboard (as we thought) and 
knocked at our door. We turned absolutely white. Perhaps 
' he had heard some thin g after all and wanted to investigate 
our secret den. It seemed like it. The knocking, pulling,
pushing, and wrenching went on. I nearly fainted at the thought 
that this utter stranger might discover our beautiful secret 
hiding place. And just as I thought my last hour was at hand, 
I heard Mr. Koophuis say, "Open the door, its only me. 
We opened it immediately. The hook that holds the cupboard, which can be undone by people who know the secret, 
had got jammed. That was why no one had been able to 
warn us about the carpenter. The man had now gone
downstairs and Koophuis wanted to fetch Elli, but eouldnt open 
the cupboard again. It was a great relief to me, I can tell you. 
In my imagination the man who I thought was trying to get 
m had been growing and growing in size until in the end he 
appeared to be a giant and the greatest fascist that ever walked 
the earth. 

Weill Weill Luckily everything was okay this time.
Meanwhile we had great fun on Monday. Miep and Henk spent 
the night here. Margot and I went in Mummy and Daddy s 
room for the night, so that the Van Santens could have our 
room. The meal tasted divine. There was one small
interruption. Daddy's lamp blew a fuse, and all of a sudden we 
were sitting in darkness. What was to be done? There was 
some fuse wire in the house, but the fuse box is right at the 
very back of the dark storeroom-not such a nice job after 
dark. Still the men ventured forth and after ten minutes we 
were able to put the candles away again. 

I got up early this morning. Henk had to leave at half past 
eight. After a cozy breakfast Miep went downstairs. It was 
pouring and she was glad not to have to cycle to the office. 
Next week Elli is coming to stay for a night. 

Yours, Anne 

Thursday , 29 October , 1942 

Dear Kitty, 

I am awfully worried, Daddy is ill. He has a high
temperature and a red rash, it looks like measles. Think of it, 
we can't even call a doctor! Mummy is letting him have 
a good sweat. Perhaps that will send his temperature down. 

This morning Miep told us that all the furniture has 
been removed from the Van Daans’ home. We haven’t told 
Mrs. Van Daan yet. She’s such a bundle of nerves already, 
and we don’t feel like listening to another moan over all the 
lovely china and beautiful chairs that she left at home. We 
had to leave almost all our nice things behind; so what’s the 
good of grumbling about it now? 

I’m allowed to read more grown-up books lately. I’m 
now reading Em’s Youth by Nico van Suchtelen. I can’t 
see much difference between this and the schoolgirl love 
stories. It is true there are bits about women selling themselves to unknown men in back streets. They ask a packet of 
money for it. I’d die of shame if anything like that happened 
to me. Also it says that Eva has a monthly period. Oh, I’m 
so longing to have it too; it seems so important. 

Daddy has brought the plays of Goethe and Schiller from 
the big cupboard. He is going to read to me every evening. 
We’ve started with Don Carlos. 

Following Daddy’s good example, Mummy has pressed 

her prayer book into my hand. For decency's sake I read 
some of the prayers in German; they are certainly beautiful 
but they don’t convey much to me. Why does she force me 
to be pious, just to oblige her? 

Tomorrow we are going to light the fire for the first time. 
I expect we shall be suffocated with smoke. The chimney 
hasn’t been swept for ages, let’s hope the thing draws. 

Yours, Anne Saturday , 7 November , 1942 

Dear Kitty, 

Mummy is frightfully irritable and that always seems to 
herald unpleasantness for me. Is it just a chance that Daddy 
and Mummy never rebuke Margot and that they always 
drop on me for everything? Yesterday evening, for instance: 
Margot was reading a book with lovely drawings in it; she 
got up and went upstairs, put the book down ready to go 
on with it later. I wasn’t doing anything, so picked up the 
book and started looking at the pictures. Margot came back, 
saw “her” book in my hands, wrinkled her forehead and 
asked for the book back. Just because I wanted to look a 
little further on, Margot got more and more angry. Then 
Mummy joined in: “Give the book to Margot; she was 
reading it,” she said. Daddy came into the room. He didn’t 
even know what it was all about, but saw the injured look 
on Margot’s face and promptly dropped on me: “I’d like to 
see what you’d say if Margot ever started looking at one of 
your books!” I gave way at once, laid the book down, and 
left the room-offended, as they thought. It so happened I 
was neither offended nor cross, just miserable. It wasn’t right 
of Daddy to judge without knowing what the squabble was 
about. I would have given Margot the book myself, and 
much more quickly, if Mummy and Daddy hadn’t interfered. 
They took Margot’s part at once, as though she were the 
victim of some great injustice. 

It’s obvious that Mummy would stick up for Margot; she 
and Margot always do back each other up. I’m so used to 

that that Fm utterly indifferent to both Mummy s jawing 
and Margot's moods. 

I love them; but only because they are Mummy and Margot. With Daddy it's different. If he holds Margot up as 
an example, approves of what she does, praises and caresses 
her, then something gnaws at me inside, because I adore 
Daddy. He is the one I look up to. I don't love anyone in 
the world but him. He doesn't notice that he treats Margot 
differently from me. Now Margot is just the prettiest, sweetest, most beautiful girl in the world. But all the same I feel 
I have some right to be taken seriously too. I have always 
been the dunce, the ne'er-do-well of the family, I've always 
had to pay double for my deeds, first with the scolding and 
then again because of the way my feelings are hurt. Now I'm 
not satisfied with this apparent favoritism any more. I want 
something from Daddy that he is not able to give me. 

I'm not jealous of Margot, never have been. I don't envy 
her good looks or her beauty. It is only that I long for Daddy’s 
real love: not only as his child, but for me— Anne, myself. 

I cling to Daddy because it is only through him that I 
am able to Tetain the remnant of family feeling. Daddy 
doesn’t understand that I need to give vent to my feelings 
over Mummy sometimes. He doesn’t want to talk about it; 
he simply avoids anything which might lead to remarks 
about Mummy's failings. Just the same, Mummy and her 
failings are something I find harder to bear than anything 
else. I don’t know how to keep it all to myself. I can’t always 
be drawing attention to her untidiness, her sarcasm, and her 
lack of sweetness, neither can I believe that I’m always in 
the wrong. 

We are exact opposites in everything; so naturally we 
are bound to run up against each other. I don't pronounce 
judgment on Mummy’s character, for that is something I 
can't judge. I only look at her as a mother, and she just 
doesn't succeed in being that to me; I have to be my own 
mother. I've drawn myself apart from them all; I am my 
own skipper and later on I shall see where I come to land. 
All this comes about particularly because I have in my mind's 

eye an image of what a perfect mother and wife should be; 
and in her whom I must call “Mother” I find no trace of 
that image. 

I am always making resolutions not to notice Mummy’s 
bad example. I want to see only the good side of her and to 
seek in myself what I cannot find in her. But it doesn’t work; 
and the worst of it is that neither Daddy nor Mummy understands this gap in my life, and I blame them for it. I wonder 
if anyone can ever succeed in making their children absolutely content. 

Sometimes I believe that God wants to try me, both now 
and later on; I must become good through my own efforts, 
without examples and without good advice. Then later on 
I shall be all the stronger. Who besides me will ever read 
these letters? From whom but myself shall I get comfort? 
As I need comforting often, I frequently feel weak, and dissatisfied with myself; my shortcomings are too great. I know 
this, and every day I try to improve myself, again and again. 

My treatment varies so much. One day Anne is so sensible 
and is allowed to know everything; and the next day I hear 
that Anne is just a silly little goat who doesn’t know anything at all and imagines that she’s learned a wonderful 
lot from books. I’m not a baby or a spoiled darling any more, 
to be laughed at, whatever she does. I have my own views, 
plans, and ideas, though I can’t put them into words yet. 
Oh, so many things bubble up inside me as I lie in bed, 
having to put up with people I’m fed up with, who always 
misinterpret my intentions. That’s why in the end I always 
come back to my diary. That is where I start and finish, because Kitty is always patient. I’ll promise her that I shall 
persevere, in spite of everything, and find my own way 
through it all, and swallow my tears. I only wish I could see 
the results already or occasionally receive encouragement from 
someone who loves me. 

Don’t condemn me; remember rather that sometimes I 
too can reach the bursting point. 

Yours, Anne 

ANNE FRANK 

Monday, 9 November , 1942 



Dear Kitty, , . L tt i j 

Yesterday was Peters birthday, be was sixteen. He had 
some nice presents. Among other things a game of Monopoly, 
a razor, and a lighter. Not that he smokes much, its really 

just for show. w _ , 

The biggest surprise came from Mr. Van Daan when, at 
one o’clock, he announced that the British had landed in 
Tunis, Algiers, Casablanca, and Oran. “This is the 
of the end ” everyone was saying, but Churchill, the British 
Prime Minister, who had probably heard the same thing in 
E nglan d , said: “This is not the end. It is not even the beginning of the end. But it is, perhaps, the end of the beginning. 
Do you see the difference? There is certainly reason for 
optimism. Stalingrad, the Russian town which they’ve already been defending for three months, still hasnt fallen 
into German hands. 

But to return to affairs in our secret den. I must tell you 
something about our food supply. As you know, we have 
some real greedy pigs on the top floor. We get our bread 
from a nice baker, a friend of Koophuis. We dont get so 
much as we used to at home, naturally. But it s sufficient. 
Four ration cards have also been bought illegally. Their 
price is going up all the time; it has now gone up from 
twenty-seven florins to thirty-three. And all that for a little 
slip of printed paper! In order to have something in the 
house that will keep, apart from our 150 tins of vegetables, 
we have bo ught 270 pounds of dried peas and beans. They 
are not all for us, some are for the office people. They are in 
sacks which hang on hooks in our little passage (inside the 
h idden door). Owing to the weight of the contents, a few 
stitches in the sacks hurst open. So we decided it would be 
better to put our winter store in the attic and Peter was given 
the job of dragging it all up there. 

He had managed to get five of the six sacks upstairs intact, 
and he was just busy pulling up number six, when the bottom 
seam of the sack split and a shower-no, a positive hailstorm 

of brown beans came pouring down and rattled down the 
stairs. There were about fifty pounds in the sack and the noise 
was enough to waken the dead. Downstairs they thought the 
old house with all its contents was coming down on them. 
(Thank God there were no strangers in the house.) It gave 
Peter a moment's fright. But he was soon roaring with laughter, especially when he saw me standing at the bottom of the 
stairs, like a little island in the middle of a sea of beans! I was 
entirely surrounded up to my ankles in beans. Quickly we 
started to pick them up. But beans are so slippery and small 
that they seemed to roll into all the possible and impossible 
corners and holes. Now, every time anyone goes downstairs 
they bend down once or twice, in order to be able to present 
Mrs. Van Daan with a handful of beans. 

I’d almost forgotten to mention that Daddy is quite better 
again. 

Yours, Anne 

P S. The news has just come over the radio that Algiers has 
fallen. Morocco, Casablanca, and Oran have been in British 
hands for several days. Now we're waiting for Tunis.