Monday, 7 December, 1942

Dear Kitty, 

Chanuka and St. Nicholas Day came almost together this 
year-just one day’s difference. We didn’t make much fuss 
about Chanuka: we just gave each other a few little presents 

and then we had the candles. Because of the shortage of 
candles we only had them alight for ten minutes, but it is all 
right as long as you have the song, Mr. Van Daan has made a 
, wooden candlestick, so that too was all properly arranged. 

Saturday, the evening of St. Nicholas Day, was much more 
fun. Miep and Elli had made us very inquisitive by whispering all the time with Daddy, so naturally we guessed that 
something was on. 

And so it was. At eight o’clock we all filed down the 
wooden staircase through the passage in pitch-darkness (it 
made me shudder and wish that I was safely upstairs again) 
into the little dark room. There, as there are no windows, we 
were able to turn on a light. When that was done, Daddy 
opened the big cupboard. “Oh! how lovely,” we all cried. A 
large basket decorated with St. Nicholas paper stood in the 
comer and on top there was a mask of Black Peter, 

We quickly took the basket upstairs with us. There was a 
nice little present for everyone, with a suitable poem attached. I got a doll, whose skirt is a bag for odds and ends; 
Daddy got book ends, and so on. In any case it was a nice idea 
and as none of us had ever celebrated St. Nicholas, it was a 
good way of starting. 

Yours, Anne 

Thursday , 10 December , 1942 

Dear Kitty, 

Mr. Van Daan used to be in the meat, sausage, and spice 
business. It was because of his knowledge of this trade that 
he was taken on in Daddy’s business. Now he is showing the 
sausagy side of himself, which, for us, is by no means disagreeable. 

We had ordered a lot of meat (under the counter, of 
course) for preserving in case we should come upon hard 
times. It was fun to watch, first the way the pieces of meat 
went through the mincer, two or three times, then how all the 
accompanying ingredients were mixed with the minced meat, 


and then how the intestine was filled by means of a spout, to 
make the sausages. We fried the sausage meat and ate it with 
sauerkraut for supper that evening, but the Gelderland sausages had to be thoroughly dried first, so we hung them 
over a stick tied to the ceiling with string. Everyone who 
came into the room began to laugh when they caught a 
glimpse of the row of sausages on show. They looked terribly 
funnyl 

The room was in a glorious mess. Mr. Van Daan was wearing one of his wife's aprons swathed round his substantial 
person (he looked fatter than he is!) and was busy with the 
meat. Hands smothered in blood, red face, and the soiled 
apron, made him look like a butcher. Mrs. Van Daan was 
trying to do everything at once, learning Dutch from a book, 
stirring the soup, watching the meat being done, sighing and 
complaining about her injured rib. That's what happens to 
elderly ladies (!) who do such idiotic exercises to reduce their 
large behinds! 

Dussel had inflammation in one eye and was bathing it 
with camomile tea by the fire. Pirn, who was sitting on a chair 
in a beam of sunlight that shone through the window, kept 
being pushed from one side to the other. In addition, I think 
his rheumatism was bothering him, because he sat rather 
hunched up with a miserable look on his face, watching Mr. 
Van Daan at work. He looked exactly like some shriveled-up 
old man from an old people’s home. Peter was doing acrobatics round the room with his cat. Mummy, Margot, and I 
were peeling potatoes; and, of course, all of us were doing 
everything wrong because we were so busy watching Mr. 
Van Daan. 

Dussel has opened his dental practice. For the fun of it, I 
must tell you about his first patient. Mummy was ironing; and Mrs. Van Daan was the first to face the ordeal. She 
went and sat on a chair in the middle of the room. Dussel 
began to unpack his case in an awfully important way, asked 
for some eau de cologne as a disinfectant and vaseline to take 
the place of wax. 

He looked in Mrs. Van Daan’s mouth and found two teeth 

which, when touched, just made her crumple up as if she was 
going to pass out, uttering incoherent cries of pain, After a 
lengthy examination (in Mrs. Van Daan’s case, lasting in 
actual fact not more than two minutes) Dussel began to 
scrape away at one of the holes. But, no fear~it was out of 
the question— the patient flung her aims and legs about 
wildly in all directions until at one point Dussel let go of the 
scraper— that remained stuck in Mrs. Van Daan’s tooth. 

Then the fat was really in the fire! She cried (as far as it 
was possible with such an instrument in one’s mouth), tried 
to pull the thing out of her mouth, and only succeeded in 
pushing it further in. Mr. Dussel stood with his hands against 
his sides calmly watching the little comedy. The rest of the 
audience lost all control and roared with laughter. It was 
rotten of us, because I for one am quite sure that I should 
have screamed even louder. After much turning, kicking, 
screaming, and calling out, she got the instrument free at last 
and Mr. Dussel went on with his work, as if nothing had happened! 

This he did so quickly that Mrs. Van Daan didn’t have 
time to start any fresh tricks. But he’d never had so much 
help in all his life before. Two assistants are pretty useful: 
Van Daan and I performed our duties well. The whole scene 
looked like, a picture from the Middle Ages entitled “A 
Quack at Work.” In the meantime, however, the patient 
hadn’t much patience; she had to keep an eye on “her” soup 
and “her” meal. One tiring is certain. Mrs. Van Daan won’t 
be in such a hurry to allow herself to be treated again! 

Yours, Anne 

Sunday, IS December, 1942 

Dear Kitty, 

I’m sitting cozily in the main office, looking outside 
through a slit in the curtain. It is dusk but still just light 
enough to write to you. 

It is a very queer sight, as I watch the people walking by; 
it looks just as if they are all in a terrible hurry and nearly 


trip over their own toes. With cyclists, now, one simply can't 
keep pace with their speed. I can’t even see what sort of person is riding on the machine. 

The people in this neighborhood don’t look very attractive. 
The children especially are so dirty yon wouldn’t want to 
touch them with a barge pole. Real slum kids with running 
noses. I can hardly understand a word they say. 

Yesterday afternoon Margot and I were having a bath here 
and I said, "Supposing we were to take the children who are 
walking past, one by one, hoist them up with a fishing rod, 
give them each a bath, wash and mend their clothes, and then 
let them go again, then . . .” Margot interrupted me, "By 
tomorrow they would look just as filthy and ragged as before.” 

But I’m just talking nonsense; besides, there are other 
things to see— cars, boats, and rain. I like particularly the 
screech of the trams as they go by. 

There is no more variety in our thoughts than there is for 
ourselves. They go round and round like a roundabout-from 
Jews to food and from food to politics. By the way, talking 
of Jews, I saw two Jews through the curtain yesterday. I 
could hardly believe my eyes; it was a horrible feeling, just as 
if I’d betrayed them and was now watching them in their 
misery. There is a houseboat immediately opposite, where a 
bargeman lives with his family. He has a small yapping dog. 
We only know the little dog by his bark and Iris tail, which 
we can see when he runs round the deck. Ugh! Now it’s 
started to rain and most of the people are hidden under 
umbrellas. I see nothing but ramcoats and occasionally the 
back of someone’s hat. Really I don’t need to see more. I’m 
gradually getting to know all the women at a glance, blown 
out with potatoes, wearing a red or a green coat, troddendown heels and with a bag under their arms. Their faces 
either look grim or kind-depending on their husbands’ dispositions. 

Yours, Anne 

Tuesday , 22 December , 1945 

Dear Kitty, 

The “Secret Annexe” has heard the joyful news that each 
person will receive an extra quarter of a pound of butter for 
Christmas. It says half a pound in the newspapers, but that’s 
only for the lucky mortals who get their ration books from 
the government, not for Jews who have gone into hiding, who 
can only afford to buy four illegal ration books, instead of 
eight. 

We are all going to bake something with our butter. I 
made some biscuits and two cakes this morning. Everyone is 
very busy upstairs and Mummy has told me I must not go 
there to work or read, until the household jobs are done. 

Mrs. Van Daan is in bed with her bruised rib, complains 
the whole day long, allows herself to be given fresh dressings 
all the time, and isn’t satisfied with anything. I shall be glad 
when she’s on her feet again and tidies up her own things, because I must say this for her; she’s exceptionally industrious 
and tidy, all the while she is healthy in mind and body. She 
is cheerful too. 

Just as if I didn’t hear enough “ssh-ssh” during the day, for 
making too much noise, my gentleman bedroom companion 
now repeatedly calls out “ssh-ssh” to me at night too. According to him, I am not even allowed to turn over! I refuse to 
take the slightest notice of him, and shall go “ssh-ssh” back 
at him the next time. 

He makes me furious, on Sundays especially, when he turns 
the light on early to do his exercises. It seems to take simply 
hours, while I, poor tormented creature, feel the chairs, which 
are placed at the head of my bed to lengthen it, slide backwards and forwards continually under my sleepy head. When 
he has ended with a couple of violent arm-waving exercises 
to loosen his muscles, His Lordship begins his toilet. His 
pants are hanging up, so to and fro he must go to collect 
them. But he forgets his tie, which is lying on the table. 
Therefore once more he pushes and bumps past the chairs 
to get it. 


But I won’t bore you any longer on the subject of old men. 
It won’t make things any better and all my plans of revenge 
(such as disconnecting the lamp, shutting die door, hiding 
his clothes) must be abandoned in order to keep the peace. 
Oh, Im becoming so sensible] One must apply one’s reason 
to everything here, learning to obey, to hold your tongue, to 
help, to be good, to give in, and I don’t know what else. I’m 
afraid I shall use up all my brains too quickly, and I haven’t 
got so very many. Then I shall not have any left for when the 
war is over. 

Yours, Anne 

Wednesday , IS January , 194S 

Dear Kitty, 

Everything has upset me again this morning, so I wasn’t 
able to finish a single thing properly. 

It is terrible outside. Day and night more of those poor 
miserable people are being dragged off, with nothing but a 
rucksack and a little money. On the way they are deprived 
even of these possessions. Families are tom apart, the men, 
women, and children all being separated. Children coming 
home from school find that their parents have disappeared. 
Women return from shopping to find their homes shut up 
and their families gone. 

The Dutch people are anxious too, their sons are being sent 
to Germany. Everyone is afraid. 

And every night hundreds of planes fly over Holland and 
go to German towns, where the earth is plowed up by their 
bombs, and every hour hundreds and thousands of people are 
killed in Russia and Africa. No one is able to keep out of it, 
the whole globe is waging war and although it is going better 
for the Allies, the end is not yet in sight. 

And as for us, we are fortunate. Yes, we are luckier than 
millions of people. It is quiet and safe here, and we are, so to 
speak, living on capital We are even so selfish as to talk about 
"after the war,” brighten up at the thought of having new 

clothes and new shoes, whereas we really ought to save every 
penny, to help other people, and save what is left from the 
wreckage after the war. 

The children here run about in just a thin blouse and clogs; 
no coat, no hat, no stockings, and no one helps them. Their 
tummies are empty, they chew an old carrot to stay the pangs, 
go from their cold homes out into the cold street and, when 
they get to school, find themselves in an even colder classroom. Yes, it has even got so bad in Holland that countless 
children stop the passers-by and beg for a piece of bread. I 
could go on for hours about all the suffering the war has 
brought, but then I would only make myself more dejected. 
There is nothing we can do but wait as calmly as we can till 
the misery comes to an end. Jews and Christians wait, the 
whole earth waits; and there are many who wait for death. 

Yours, Anne 

Saturday , SO January, 1943 

Dear Kitty, 

I’m boiling with rage, and yet I mustn’t show it. I’d like to 
stamp my feet, scream, give Mummy a good shaking, cry, and 
I don’t know what else, because of the horrible words, mocking looks, and accusations which are leveled at me repeatedly 
every day, and find their mark, like shafts from a tightly 
strung bow, and which are just as hard to draw from my 
body. 

I would like to shout to Margot, Van Daan, Dussel— and 
Daddy too— “Leave me in peace, let me sleep one night at 
least without my pillow being wet with tears, my eyes burning and my head throbbing. Let me get away from it all, 
preferably away from the world!” But I can’t do that, they 
mustn’t lmow my despair, I can’t let them see the wounds 
which they have caused, I couldn’t bear their sympathy and 
their kindhearted jokes, it would only make me want to 
scream all the more. If I talk, everyone thinks I’m showing 
off; when I’m silent they think I’m ridiculous; rude if I an

swer, sly if I get a good idea, lazy if Fm tired, selfish if I eat a 
mouthful more than I should, stupid, cowardly, crafty, etc., 
etc. The whole day long I hear nothing else but that I am an 
insufferable baby, and although I laugh about it and pretend 
not to take any notice, I do mind. I would like to ask God 
to give me a different nature, so that I didn't put everyone's 
back up. But that can't be done. Fve got the nature that has 
been given to me and Fm sure it can't be bad. I do my very 
best to please everybody, far more than they'd ever guess. I 
try to laugh it all off, because I don’t want to let them see my 
trouble. More than once, after a whole string of undeserved 
rebukes, I have flared up at Mummy: “I don't care what you 
say anyhow. Leave me alone: Fm a hopeless case anyway.” 
Naturally, I was then told I was rude and was virtually 
ignored for two days; and then, all at once, it was quite forgotten, and I was treated like everyone else again. It is impossible for me to be all sugar one day and spit venom the 
next. Fd rather choose the golden mean (which is not so 
golden), keep my thoughts to myself, and try for once to be 
just as disdainful to them as they are to me. Oh, if only I 
could! 

Yours, Anne 

Friday , 5 February , 1943 

Dear Kitty, 

Although I haven't written anything about our rows for a 
long time, there still isn’t any change. The discord, long accepted by us, struck Mr. Dussel as a calamity at first. But he 
is getting used to it now and tries not to think about it. 
Margot and Peter aren't a bit what you would call "young,” 
they are both so staid and quiet. I show up terribly against 
them and am always hearing, "You don't find Margot and 
Peter doing that— why don’t you follow their example?” I 
simply loathe it. I might tell you 1 don't want to be in the 
least like Margot. She is much too soft and passive for my 
liking and allows everyone to talk her around, and gives in 

about everything. I want to be a stronger character! But I 
keep such ideas to myself: they would only laugh at me, if I 
came along with this as an explanation of my attitude. The 
atmosphere at table is usually strained, though luckily the 
outbursts are sometimes checked by "the soup eaters”! The 
“soup eaters” are the people from the office who come in and 
are served with a cup of soup. This afternoon Mr. Van Daan 
was talking about Margot eating so little again, "I suppose 
you do it to keep slim,” he added, teasing her. Mummy, who 
always defends Margot, said loudly: “I can't bear your stupid 
chatter any longer.” Mr. Van Daan turned scarlet, looked 
straight in front of him, and said nothing. We often laugh 
about things; just recently Mrs. Van Daan came out with 
some perfect nonsense. She was recalling the past, how well 
she and her father got on together and what a flirt she was. 
“And do you know,” she went on, “if a man gets a bit aggressive, my father used to say, then you must say to him, ‘Mr. 
So and So, remember I am a lady!' and he will know what you 
mean.” We thought that was a good joke and burst out laughing. Peter too, although usually so quiet, sometimes gives 
cause for mirth. He is blessed with a passion for foreign 
words, although he does not always know their meaning. On© 
afternoon we couldn't go to the lavatory because there were 
visitors in the office; however, Peter had to pay an urgent call. 
So he didn't pull the plug. He put a notice up on the lavatory door to warn us, with “S.V.P. gas” on it. Of course he 
meant to put “Beware of gas”; but he thought the other 
looked more genteel. He hadn’t got the faintest notion it 
meant “if you please.” 

Yours, Anne 

Saturday , 27 February , 1943 

Dear Kitty, 

Pirn is expecting the invasion any day. Churchill has had 
pneumonia, but is improving slowly. The freedom-loving 
Gandhi of India is holding his umpteenth fast. Mrs. Van 

ANNE FRANK 

Daan claims to be fatalistic. But who is the most scared when 
the guns go off? No one else but Petronella. 

Henk brought a copy of the bishop’s letter to churchgoers 
for us to read. It was very fine and inspiring. “Do not rest, 
people of the Netherlands, everyone is fighting with his own 
weapons to free the country, the people, and their religion.” 
"Give help, be generous, and do not dismayl” is what they cry 
from the pulpit, just like that. Will it help? It won’t help the 
people of our religion. 

You’d never guess what has happened to us now. The 
owner of these premises has sold the house without informing 
Kraler and Koophuis. One morning the new owner arrived 
with an architect to have a look at the house. Luckily, Mr. 
Koophuis was present and showed the gentlemen everything 
except the "Secret Annexe.” He professed to have forgotten 
the key of the communicating door. The new owner didn’t 
question any further. It will be all right as long as he doesn’t 
come back and want to see the “Secret Annexe,” because then 
it won’t look too good for us. 

Daddy has emptied a card index box for Margot and me, 
and put cards in it. It is to be a book card system; then we 
both write down which books we have read, who they are by, 
etc I have procured another little notebook for foreign words. 

Lately Mummy and I have been getting on better together, 
but we still never confide in each other. Margot is more catty 
than ever and Daddy has got something he is keeping to himself, but he remains the same darling. 

New butter and margarine rationing at table! Each person 
has their little bit of fat put on their plate. In my opinion the 
Van Daans don’t divide it at all fairly. However, my parents 
are much too afraid of a row to say anything about it. Pity, I 
think you should always give people like them tit for tat. 

Yours, Anne