Thursday, 3 February, 1944

Dear Kitty, 

Invasion fever in the country is mounting daily. If you were 
here, on the one hand, you would probably feel the effect of 
all these preparations just as I do and, on the other, you would 
laugh at us for making such a fuss-who knows— perhaps for 
nothing. 

All the newspapers are full of the invasion and are driving 
people mad by saying that “In the event of the English landing in Holland, the Germans will do all they can to defend 
the country, if necessary they will resort to flooding.” With 
this, maps have been published, on which the parts of Holland 



that will be under water are marked. As this applies to large 
parts of Amsterdam, the first question was, what shall we do 
if the water in the streets rises to one meter? The answers 
given by diffeient people vary considerably. 

“As walking or cycling is out of the question, we shall have 
to wade through the stagnant water.” 

“Of course not, one will have to try and swim. We shall all 
put on our bathing suits and caps and swim under water as 
much as possible, then no one will see that we are Jews.” 

“Oh, what nonsense! I’d like to see the ladies swimming, if 
the rats started biting their legs!” (That was naturally a man: 
just see who screams the loudest!) 

“We shan’t be able to get out of the house anyway; the 
warehouse will definitely collapse if there is a flood, it is so 
wobbly already.” 

“Listen, folks, all joking apart, we shall try and get a boat.” 

“Why bother? I know something much better. We each get 
hold of a wooden packing case from the attic and row with a 
soup ladle!” 

“I shall walk on stilts: I used to be an expert at it in my 
youth ” 

“Henk Van Santen won’t need to, he’s sure to take his wife 
on his back, then she’ll be on stilts ” 

This gives you a rough idea, doesn’t it, Kit? 

This chatter is all very amusing, but the truth may be otherwise. A second question about the invasion was bound to 
arise what do we do if the Germans evacuate Amsterdam? 

“Leave the city too, and disguise ourselves as best we can.” 

“Don’t go, whatever happens, stay put! The only thing to 
do is to remain here! The Germans are quite capable of driving the whole population right into Germany, where they will 
all die.” 

“Yes, naturally, we shall stay here, since this is the safest 
place Well try and fetch Koophuis and his family over here 
to come and live with us Well try and get hold of a sack of 
wood wool, then we can sleep on the floor. Let’s ask Miep 
and Koophuis to start bringing blankets here.” 

“Well order some extra corn in addition to our sixty 


pounds. Let’s get Henk to try and obtain more peas and 
beans, we have about sixty pounds of beans and ten pounds 
of peas m the house at present. Don’t forget that we’ve got 
fifty tins of vegetables.” 

“Mummy, just count up how much we’ve got of other food, 
will you?” 

“Ten tins of fish, forty tins of milk, ten kilos of milk powder, 
three bottles of salad oil, four preservmg jars of butter, four 
ditto of meat, two wicker-covered bottles of strawberries, two 
bottles of raspberries, twenty bottles of tomatoes, ten pounds 
of rolled oats, eight pounds of rice; and that’s all. 

“Our stock’s not too bad, but if you think that we may be 
having visitors as well and drawing from reserves each week, 
then it seems more than it actually is. We have sufficient coal 
and firewood in the house, also candles. Let’s all make little 
moneybags, which could easily be hidden in our clothing, in 
case we want to take money with us. 

“We’ll make lists of the most important things to take, 
should we have to run for it, and pack rucksacks now m readiness. If it gets that far, well put two people on watch, one in 
the front and one in the back loft. I say, what’s the use of collecting such stocks of food, if we haven’t any water, gas, or 
electricity?” 

“Then we must cook on the stove. Filter and boil our water. 
We’ll clean out some large wicker bottles and store water m 
them.” 

I hear nothing but this sort of talk the whole day long, invasion and nothing but invasion, arguments about suffering 
from hunger, dying, bombs, fire extinguishers, sleepmg bags, 
Jewish vouchers, poisonous gases, etc., etc. None of it is exactly cheering. The gentlemen m the “Secret Annexe” give 
pretty straightforward warnings; an example is the following 
conversation with Henk: 

“Secret Annexe”: “We are afraid that if the Germans withdraw, they will take the whole population with them.” 

Henk: ‘“That is impossible, they haven’t the trains at their 
disposal.” 

“S A.”.* “Trains? Do you really think they’d put civilians in 

carriages? Out of the question. They could use ‘shank's 
mare.' " (Per pedes apostolorum, Dussel always says. ) 

H.: “I don't believe a word of it, you look on the black 
side of everything What would be their object in driving all 
the civilians along with them?" 

“S A.": “Didn’t you know that Goebbels said, If we have 
to withdraw, we shall slam the doors of all the occupied 
countries behmd us'?" 

H.. “They have said so much already.” 

“S.A.": “Do you think the Germans are above doing such 
a thing or too humane? What they think is this. If we have 
got to go down, then everybody m our clutches will go down 
with us.”’ 

H.: “Tell that to the Marines; I just don’t believe it!" 

“S.A.”: “It’s always the same song; no one will see danger 
approaching until it is actually on top of him." 

H : “But you know nothing definite; you just simply suppose ” 

“$ A “We have all been through it ourselves, first in 
Germany, and then here. And what is going on in Russia?” 

H . “You mustn’t mclude the Jews. I don’t think anyone 
knows what is going on in Russia The English and the Russians are sure to exaggerate things for propaganda purposes, 
just like the Germans " 

“S.A.": “Out of the question, the English have always told 
the truth over the wireless. And suppose they do exaggerate 
the news, the facts are bad enough anyway, because you can’t 
deny that many millions of peace-loving people were just 
simply muidered or gassed in Poland and Russia" 

I will spare you further examples of these conversations; I 
myself keep very quiet and don't take any notice of all the 
fuss and excitement. I have now reached the stage that I 
don’t care much whether I live or die. The world will still 
keep on turning without me; what is going to happen, 
will happen, and anyway it’s no good trying to resist. 

I trust to luck and do nothing but work, hoping that all 
will end well. 

Yours, Anne 


Saturday , 12 February , 1944 

Dear Kitty, 

The sun is s hinin g, the sky is a deep blue, there is a lovely 
breeze and I’m longing-so longing~for everything. To talk, 
for freedom, for friends, to be alone. And I do so long ... to 
cry! I feel as if I’m going to burst, and I know that it would 
get better with crying; but I can’t, I’m restless, I go from one 
room to the other, breathe through the crack of a closed window, feel my heart beating, as if it is saying, “Can’t you satisfy 
my longings at last?” 

I believe that it’s spring within me, I feel that spring is 
awakening, I feel it in my whole body and soul. It is an effort 
to behave normally, I feel utterly confused, don’t know what 
to read, what to write, what to do, I only know that I am longing ... 1 

Yours, Anne