Tuesday , 2 May, 1944

Dear Kitty, 

On Saturday evening I asked Peter whether he thought 
that I ought to tell Daddy a bit about us; when we’d discussed it a little, he came to the conclusion that I should. I 
was glad, for it shows that he’s an honest boy. As soon as I 

got downstairs I went off with Daddy to get some water; 
and while we were on the stairs I said, "Daddy, I expect 
youve gathered that when were together Peter and I don’t 
sit miles apart. Do you think it’s wrong?” Daddy didn’t reply 
immediately, then said, "No, I don’t think it’s wrong, but you 
must be careful, Anne, you’re in such a confined space here.” 
When we went upstairs, he said something else on the same 
lines. On Sunday morning he called me to him and said, 
"Anne, I have thought more about what you said.” I felt 
scared already. "It’s not really very right-here in this house; 
I thought that you were just pals. Is Peter in love?” 

“Oh, of course not,” I replied. 

“You know that I understand both of you, but you must 
be the one to hold back. Don’t go upstairs so often, don’t 
encourage him more than you can help. It is the man who is 
always the active one in these things; the woman can hold 
him back. It is quite different under normal circumstances, 
when you are free, you see other boys and girls, you can get 
away sometimes, play games and do all kinds of other things; 
but here, if you’re together a lot, and you want to get away, 
you can’t; you see each other every hour of the day-in fact, 
all the time. Be careful, Anne, and don’t take it too seriously!” 

“I don’t, Daddy, but Peter is a decent boy, really a nice 
boy!” 

“Yes, but he is not a strong character; he can be easily influenced, for good, but also for bad; I hope for his sake that 
his good side will remain uppermost, because, by nature, that 
is how he is.” 

We talked on for a bit and agreed that Daddy should talk 
to him too. 

On Sunday morning in the attic he asked, “And have you 
talked to your father, Anne?” 

“Yes,” I replied, “I’ll tell you about it. Daddy doesn’t think 
it’s bad, but he says that here, where were so close together 
all the time, clashes may easily arise.” 

“But we agreed, didn’t we, never to quarrel; and I’m determined to stick to it!” 

“So will I, Peter, but Daddy didn’t think that it was like 

 

this, he just thought we were pals; do you think that we still 
can be?” 

"I can— what about you?” 

"Me too, I told Daddy that I trusted you. I do trust you, 
Peter, just as much as I trust Daddy, and I believe you to be 
worthy of it. You are, aren't you, Peter?” 

"I hope so.” (He was very shy and rather red in the face.) 

"I believe in you, Peter,” I went on, "I believe that you 
have good qualities, and that you 11 get on in the world.” 

After that, we talked about other things. Later I said, "If 
we come out of here, I know quite well that you won’t bother 
about me any more!” 

He flared right up. "That’s not true, Anne, oh no, I won’t 
let you think that of me!” 

Then I was called away. 

Daddy has talked to him; he told me about it today. ‘"Your 
father thought that the friendship might develop into love 
sooner or later,” he said. But I replied that we would keep a 
check on ourselves. 

Daddy doesn’t want me to go upstairs so much in the evenings now, but I don’t want that. Not only because I like being with Peter; I have told him that I trust him. I do trust 
him and I want to show him that I do, which can’t happen if 
I stay downstairs through lack of trust. 

No, I’m going! 

In the meantime the Dussel drama has righted itself again. 
At supper on Saturday evening he apologized in beautiful 
Dutch. Van Daan was nice about it straight away; it must 
have taken Dussel a whole day to learn that little lesson off 
by heart. 

Sunday, his birthday, passed peacefully. We gave him a 
bottle of good 1919 wine, from the Van Daans (who could 
give their presents now after all) , a bottle of piccalilli and a 
packet of razor blades, a jar of lemon jam from Kraler, a 
book, Little Martin, from Miep, and a plant from Elli. He 
treated each one of us to an egg. 

Yours, Anne 

Wednesday , 3 May , 1944 

Dear Kitty, 

First, just the news of the week. Were having a holiday 
from politics, there is nothing, absolutely nothing to announce. I too am gradually beginning to believe that the invasion will come. After all, they can’t let the Russians clear 
up everything; for that matter, they’re not doing anything 
either at the moment. 

Mr. Koophuis comes to the office every morning again now. 
He’s got a new* spring for Peter’s divan, so Peter will have to 
do some upholstering, about which, quite understandably, he 
doesn’t feel a bit happy. 

Have I told you that Boche has disappeared? Simply vanished— we haven’t seen a sign of her since Thursday of last 
week I expect she’s already in the cats’ heaven, while some 
animal lover is enjoying a succulent meal from her. Perhaps 
some little girl will be given a fur cap out of her skin. Peter 
is very sad about it. 

Since Saturday we’ve changed over, and have lunch at half 
past eleven m the mornings, so we have to last out with one 
cupful of porridge; this saves us a meal Vegetables are still 
very difficult to obtain: we had rotten boiled lettuce this 
afternoon. Ordinary lettuce, spinach, and boiled lettuce, 
there’s nothing else. With these we eat rotten potatoes, so it’s 
a delicious combination! 

As you can easily imagine we often ask ourselves here 
despairingly: “What, oh, what is the use of the war? Why 
can’t people live peacefully together? Why all this destruction?” 

The question is very understandable, but no one has found 
a satisfactory answer to it so far. Yes, why do they make still 
more gigantic planes, still heavier bombs and, at the same 
time, prefabricated houses for reconstruction? Why should 
millions be spent daily on the war and yet there’s not a penny 
available for medical services, artists, or for poor people? 

Why do some people have to starve, while there are sur


pluses rotting in other parts of the world? Oh, why are people 
so crazy? 

I don’t believe that the big men, the politicians and the 
capitalists alone, are guilty of the war. Oh no, the little man is 
just as guilty, otherwise the peoples of the world would have 
risen in revolt long ago! There’s in people simply an urge to 
destroy, an urge to kill, to murder and rage, and until all mankind, without exception, undergoes a great change, wars will 
be waged, everything that has been built up, cultivated, and 
grown will be destroyed and disfigured, after which mankind 
will have to begin all over again. 

I have often been downcast, but never in despair; I regard 
our hiding as a dangerous adventure, romantic and interesting at the same time. In my diary I treat all the privations as 
amusing. I have made up my mind now to lead a different 
life from other girls and, later on, different from ordinary 
housewives. My start has been so very full of interest, and that 
is the sole reason why I have to laugh at the humorous side of 
the most dangerous moments. 

I am young and I possess many buried qualities; I am young 
and strong and am living a great adventure; I am still in the 
midst of it and can’t grumble the whole day long. I have been 
given a lot, a happy nature, a great deal of cheerfulness and 
strength. Every day I feel that I am developing inwardly, that 
the liberation is drawing nearer and how beautiful nature is, 
how good the people are about me, how interesting this adventure is! Why, then, should I be in despair? 

Yours, Anne 

Friday , 5 May , 1944 

Dear Kitty, 

Daddy is not pleased with me; he thought that after our 
talk on Sunday I automatically wouldn’t go upstairs every 
evening. He doesn’t want any "necking,” a word I can’t bear. 
It was bad enough talking about it, why must he make it so 
unpleasant now? I shall talk to him today. Margot has given 

me some good advice, so listen; this is roughly what I want 
to say: 

“I believe, Daddy, that you expect a declaration from me, 
so I will give it you. You are disappointed in me, as you had 
expected more reserve from me, and I suppose you want me to 
be just as a fourteen-year-old should be. But that’s where 
you re mistaken! 

“Since we’ve been here, from July 1942 until a few weeks 
ago, I can assure you that I haven't had an easy time. If 
you only knew how I cried in the evening, how unhappy I 
was, how lonely I felt, then you would understand that I 
want to go upstairs! 

“I have now reached the stage that I can live entirely on 
my own, without Mummy’s support or anyone else’s for that 
matter. But it hasn’t just happened in a night; it’s been a 
bitter, hard struggle and I’ve shed many a tear, before I became as independent as I am now. You can laugh at me and 
not believe me, but that can’t harm me. I know that I’m a 
separate individual and I don’t feel in the least bit responsible 
to any of you. I am only telling you this because I thought 
that otherwise you might think that I was underhand, but I 
don’t have to give an account of my deeds to anyone but myself. 

“When I was in difficulties you all closed your eyes and 
stopped up your ears and didn’t help me; on the contrary, I 
received nothing but warnings not to be so boisterous. I was 
only boisterous so as not to be miserable all the time. I was 
reckless so as not Lo hear that persistent voice within me 
continually. I played a comedy for a year and a half, day in, 
day out, I never grumbled, never lost my cue, nothing like 
that— and now, now the battle is over. I have won! I am independent both in mind and body. I don’t need a mother any 
more, for all this conflict has made me strong. 

“And now, now that I’m on top of it, now that I know 
that I’ve fought the battle, now I want to be able to go on in 
my own way too, the way that I think is right. You can’t and 
mustn’t regard me as fourteen, for all these troubles have 
made me older; I shall not be sorry for what I have done, but 



shall act as I think I can. You can’t coax me into not going 
upstairs; either you forbid it, or you trust me through thick 
and thin, but then leave me in peace as welll” 

Yours, Anne 

Saturday, 6 May , 1944 

Dear Kitty, 

I put a letter, in which I wrote what I explained to you 
yesterday, in Daddy’s pocket before supper yesterday. After 
reading it, he was, according to Margot, very upset for the 
rest of the evening. (I was upstairs doing the dishes.) Poor 
Pirn, I might have known what the effect of such an epistle 
would be. He is so sensitive! I immediately told Peter not to 
ask or say anything more. Pirn hasn’t said any more about it 
to me. Is that yet in store, I wonder? 

Here everything is going on more or less normally again. 
What they tell us about the prices and the people outside is 
almost unbelievable, half a pound of tea costs 350 florins, 1 a 
pound of coffee 80 florins, butter 35 florins per pound, an 
egg 1.45 florin. People pay 14 florins for an ounce of Bulgarian tobacco! Everyone deals in the black market, every 
errand boy has something to offer. Our baker’s boy got hold 
of some sewing silk, 0.9 florin for a thin little skein, the milkman manages to get clandestine ration cards, the undertaker 
delivers the cheese. Burglaries, murders, and theft go on 
daily. The police and night watchmen jain in just as strenuously as the professionals, everyone wants something in their 
empty stomachs and because wage increases are forbidden 
the people simply have to swindle. The police are continually 
on the go, tracing girls of fifteen, sixteen, seventeen and 
older, who are reported missing every day. 

Yours, Anne 

*A florin is equal to approximately twenty-eight cents. 

Sunday morning, 7 May, 1944 

Dear Kitty, 

Daddy and I Rad a long talk yesterday afternoon, I cried 
tembly and Re joined in. Do yon know wRat Re said to me, 
Kitty? “I Rave received many letters in my life, but tins is certainly ffte most unpleasant! You, Anne, wRo Rave received 
sucR love from your parents, you, wRo Rave parents wRo are 
always ready to Relp you, who Rave always defended you 
wRatever it migRt be, can you talk of feeling no responsibility towards us? You feel wronged and deserted; no, Anne, 
you Rave done us a great injustice! 

“Perhaps you didn’t mean it like that, but it is what you 
wrote; no, Anne, we haven’t deserved such a reproach as 
this!” 

OR, I Rave failed miserably; this is certainly the worst thing 
I’ve ever done in my life. I was only trying to show off with 
my crying and my tears, just trying to appear big, so that Re 
would respect me. Certainly, I Rave had a lot of unhappiness, 
but to accuse the good Pirn, who has done and still does do 
everything for me~-no, that was too low for words. 

It’s right that for once I’ve been taken down from my inaccessible pedestal, that my pride has been shaken a bit, for 
I was becoming much too taken up with myself again. What 
Miss Anne does is by no means always right! Anyone who can 
cause such unhappiness to someone else, someone Re professes to love, and on purpose, too, is low, very low! 

And the way Daddy has forgiven me makes me feel more 
than ever ashamed of myself, Re is going to throw the letter 
in the fire and is so sweet to me now, just as if he had done 
something wrong. No, Anne, you still have a tremendous lot 
to learn, begin by doing that first, instead of looking down on 
others and accusing them! 

I have Rad a lot of sorrow, but who hasn’t at my age? I 
Rave played the clown a lot too, but I was hardly conscious 
of it; I felt lonely, but hardly ever in despair! I ought to be 
deeply ashamed of myself, and indeed I am. 

WRat is done cannot be undone, but one can prevent it 



happening again. I want to start from the beginning again 
and it can't be difficult, now that I have Peter. With him to 
support me, I can and will! 

I’m not alone any more; he loves me. I love him, I have my 
books, my storybook and my diary, I’m not so frightfully ugly, 
not utterly stupid, have a cheerful temperament and want to 
have a good character! 

Yes, Anne, you’ve felt deeply that your letter was too hard 
and that it was untrue. To think that you were even proud 
of it! I will take Daddy as my example, and I will improve. 

Yours, Anne 

Monday , 8 May , 1944 

Dear Kitty, 

Have I ever really told you anything about our family? 

I don’t think I have, so I will begin now. My father’s 
parents were very rich. His father had worked himself right 
up and his mother came from a prominent family, who were 
also rich. So in his youth Daddy had a real little rich boy’s 
upbringing, parties every week, balls, festivities, beautiful 
girls, dinners, a large home, etc., etc. 

After Grandpa’s death all the money was lost during the 
World War and the inflation that followed. Daddy was 
therefore extremely well brought up and he laughed very 
much yesterday when, for the first time in his fifty-five years, 
he scraped out the frying pan at table. 

Mummy’s parents were rich too and we often listen openmouthed to stories of engagement parties of two hundred and 
fifty people, private balls and dinners. One certainly could 
not call us rich now, but all my hopes are pinned on after the 
war. 

I can assure you I’m not at all keen on a narrow, cramped 
existence like Mummy and Margot I’d adore to go to Paris 
for a year and London for a year to learn the languages and 
study the history of art. Compare that with Margot, who 

wants to be a midwife in Palestinel I always long to see 
beautiful dresses and interesting people, 

I want to see something of the world and do all kinds of 
exciting things. I’ve already told you this before. And a little 
money as well won't do any harm. 

Miep told us this morning about a party she went to, to 
celebrate an engagement. Both the future bride and bridegroom came from rich families and everything was very 
grand. Miep made our mouths water telling us about the food 
they had: vegetable soup with minced meat balls in it, cheese, 
rolls, hors d’oeuvre with eggs and roast beef, fancy cakes, 
wine and cigarettes, as much as you wanted of everything 
(black market). Miep had ten drinks— can that be the 
woman who calls herself a teetotaler? If Miep had all those, 
I wonder however many her spouse managed to knock back? 
Naturally, everyone at the party was a bit tipsy. There were 
two policemen from the fighting squad, who tooks photos of 
the engaged couple. It seems as if we are never far from 
Miep’s thoughts, because she took down the addresses of 
these men at once, in case anything should happen at 
some time or other, and good Dutchmen might come in 
useful. 

She made our mouths water. We, who get nothing but two 
spoonfuls of porridge for our breakfast and whose tummies 
were so empty that they were positively rattling, we, who get 
nothing but half-cooked spinach (to preserve the vitamins) 
and rotten potatoes day after day, we, who get nothing but 
lettuce, cooked or raw, spinach and yet again spinach in our 
hollow stomachs. Perhaps we may yet grow to be as strong as 
Popeye, although I don't see much sign of it at presentl 

If Miep had taken us to the party we shouldn't have left 
any rolls for the other guests. I can tell you, we positively 
drew the words from Miep's lips, we gathered round her, as if 
we’d never heard about delicious food or smart people in our 
lives before! 

And these are the granddaughters of a millionaire. The 
world is a queer place! 

Yours, Anne 



Tuesday , 9 May , 1944 

Dear Kitty, 

I’ve finished my story of Ellen the fairy. I have copied it 
out on nice note paper. It certainly looks very attractive, but 
is it really enough for Daddy’s birthday? I don’t know. 
Margot and Mummy have both written poems for him. 

Mr. Kraler came upstairs this afternoon with the news that 
Mrs. B., who used to act as demonstrator for the business, 
wants to eat her box lunch in the office here at two o’clock 
every afternoon. Think of itS No one can come upstairs any 
more, the potatoes cannot be delivered, Elli can’t have any 
lunch, we can’t go to the W.C., we mustn’t move, etc., etc. 
We thought up the wildest and most varied suggestions to 
wheedle her away. Van Daan thought that a good laxative in 
her coffee would be sufficient. “No,” replied Koophuis, “I beg 
of you not, then we’d never get her off the boxl” Resounding 
laughter. “Off the box,” asked Mrs. Van Daan, “what does 
that mean?” An explanation followed. “Can I always use it?” 
she then asked stupidly. “Imagine it,” Elli giggled, “if one 
asked for the box in Bijenkorf’s 1 they wouldn’t even understand what you mean!” 

Oh, Kit, it’s such wonderful weather, if only I could go 
outdoorsl 

Yours, Anne 

Wednesday , 10 May , 1944 

Dear Kitty, 

We were sitting in the attic doing some French yesterday 
afternoon when I suddenly heard water pattering down behind me. I asked Peter what it could be, but he didn’t even 
reply, simply tore up to the loft, where the source of the 
disaster was, and pushed Mouschi, who, because of the wet 
earth box, had sat down beside it, harshly back to the right 

1 “Bijenkorf” is a large store in Amsterdam. 

THE DIARY OF A YOUNG GIRL 205 

place. A great din and disturbance followed, and Mouschi, 
who had finished by that time, dashed downstairs. 

Mouschi, seeking the convenience of something similar to 
his box, had chosen some wood shavings. The pool had 
trickled down from the loft into the attic immediately and, 
unfortunately, landed just beside and in the barrel of potatoes. 
The ceiling was dripping, and as the attic floor is not free from 
holes either, several yellow drips came through the ceiling 
into the dining room between a pile of stockings and some 
books, which were lying on the table. I was doubled up with 
laughter, it really was a scream. There was Mouschi crouching 
under a chair, Peter with water, bleaching powder, and floor 
cloth, and Van Daan trying to soothe everyone. The calamity 
was soon over, but its a well-known fact that cats’ puddles 
positively stink. The potatoes proved this only too clearly and 
also the wood shavings that Daddy collected in a bucket to 
be burned. Poor Mouschi! How were you to know that peat is 
unobtainable? 

Yours, Anne 

P.S. Our beloved Queen spoke to us yesterday and this 
evening. She is taking a holiday in order to be strong for her 
return to Holland. She used words like “soon, when I am 
back, speedy liberation, heroism, and heavy burdens.” 

A speech by Gerbrandy followed. A clergyman concluded 
with a prayer to God to take care of the Jews, the people in 
concentration camps, in prisons, and in Germany. 

Yours, Anne