Tuesday, 13 July, 1943

Dear Kitty, 

Yesterday afternoon, with Daddy’s permission, I asked Dussel whether he would please be so good (being really very 
polite) as to allow me to use the little table in our room twice 
a week in the afternoons, from four o’clock till half past five. 
I sit there every day from half past two till four, while Dussel 
sleeps, but otherwise the room plus table are out of bounds. 
Inside, in our common room, there is much too much going 
on, it is impossible to work there, and besides, Daddy likes to 
sit at the writing table and work too sometimes. 

So it was quite a reasonable request, and the question was 
put very politely. Now honestly what do you think the very 
learned Dussel replied: "No.” Just plain "No! I was indignant 
and refused to be put off like that, so I asked him the reason 
for his "No.” But I was sent away with a flea in my ear. This 
was the barrage which followed: 

“I have to work too, and if I can’t work in the afternoons, 
then there is no time left for me at all. I must finish my task, 



otherwise I’ve started it all for nothing. Anyway, you don't 
work seriously at anything. Your mythology, now just what 
kind of work is that; knitting and reading are not work either. 
I am at the table and shall stay there.” My reply was: 

“Mr. Dussel, I do work seriously and there is nowhere else 
for me to work in the afternoons. I beg of you to kindly reconsider my request!” 

With these words the offended Anne turned her back on 
the very learned doctor, ignoring him completely. I was seedling with rage, and thought Dussel frightfully rude (which he 
certainly was) and myself very friendly. In the evening when 
I could get hold of Pirn, I told him how it had gone off and 
discussed what I should do next, because I was not going to 
give in, and preferred to clear it up myself. Pim told me how 
I ought to tackle the problem, but warned me that it would 
be better to leave it till the next day, as I was so het up. I let 
this advice go to the winds, and waited for Dussel after the 
dishes were done. Pim sat in the room next to us, which had a 
calming influence on me. I began: “Mr. Dussel, I don't suppose you see any point in discussing the matter any more, but 
I must ask you to do so.” Dussel then remarked with his 
sweetest smile: “I am always, and at all times, prepared to 
discuss this matter, but it has already been settled.” 

I went on talking, though continually interrupted by 
Dussel. “When you first came here we arranged that this 
room should be for both of us; if we were to divide it fairly, 
you would have the morning and I all the afternoon! Rut I 
don't even ask that much, and I think that my two afternoons 
are really perfectly reasonable.” At this Dussel jumped up as 
if someone had stuck a needle into him. “You can't talk 
about your rights here at all. And where am I to go, then? 
I shall ask Mr. Van Daan whether he will build a little compartment in the attic, then I can go and sit there. I simply 
can't work anywhere. With you one always gets trouble. If 
your sister Margot, who after all has more reason to ask such 
a thing, would have come to me with the same questions, I 
should not think of refusing, but you . . .” Then followed 
the business about the mythology and the knitting, and Anne 


was insulted again. However, she did not show it and let 
Dussel finish speaking: "But you, one simply cant talk to 
you. You are so outrageously selfish, as long as you can get 
what you want, you don’t mind pushing everyone else to one 
side, I’ve never seen such a child. But after all, I suppose I 
shall be obliged to give you your own way, because otherwise 
I shall be told later on that Anne Frank failed her exam 
because Mr. Dussel would not give up the table for her.” 

It went on and on and finally it was such a torrent I could 
hardly keep pace with it. At one moment I thought, “In a 
minute I’ll give him such a smack in the face that he’ll fly 
up to the ceiling together with his lies,” but the next moment 
I said to myself, “Keep calm! Such a fellow isn’t worth getting worked up about.” 

After giving final vent to his fury, Master Dussel left the 
room with an expression of mixed wrath and triumph, his 
coat stuffed with food. I dashed to Daddy and told him all 
that he had not already heard of the story. Pim decided to 
talk to Dussel the same evening, which he did. They talked 
for over half an hour. The theme of the conversation was 
something like this: first of all they talked about whether 
Anne should sit at the table, yes or no. Daddy said that he 
and Dussel had already discussed the subject once before, 
when he had professed to agree with Dussel, in order not to 
put him m the wrong in front of the young. But Daddy had 
not thought it fair then. Dussel thought that I should not 
speak as if he was an intruder who tried to monopolize everything, hut Daddy stuck up for me firmly over that, because 
he had heard for himself that I had not breathed a word of 
such a thing. 

To and fro it went, Daddy defending my selfishness and 
my “trifling” work, Dussel grumbling continually. 

Finally, Dussel had to give in after all, and I had the opportunity of working undisturbed until five o’clock for two 
afternoons a week. Dussel looked down his nose very much, 
didn’t speak to me for two days and still had to go and sit at 
the table from five till half past— frightfully childish. 

THE DIARY OF A YOUNG GIRL 79 

A person of fifty-four who is still so pedantic and smallminded must be so by nature, and will never improve. 

Yours, Anne