Saturday , 22 January, 1944

Dear Kitty, 

I wonder whether you can tell me why it is that people always try so hard to hide their real feelings? How is it that I 
always behave quite differently from what I should in other 
people’s company? 

Why do we trust one another so little? I know there must be 
a reason, but still 1 sometimes think it’s horrible that you find 
you can never really confide in people, even in those who are 
nearest to you. 


It seems as if I’ve grown up a lot since my dream the other 
night. I’m much more of an “independent being.” You’ll certainly be amazed when I tell you that even my attitude towards the Van Daans has changed. I suddenly see all the 
arguments and the rest of it in a different light, and am not as 
prejudiced as I was. 

How can I have changed so much? Yes, you see it suddenly 
struck me that if Mummy had been different, a real Mumsie, 
the relationship might have been quite, quite different. It’s 
true that Mrs. Van Daan is by no means a nice person, but still 
I do think that half the quarrels could be avoided if it weren’t 
for the fact that when the conversation gets tricky Mummy is 
a bit difficult too. 

Mrs. Van Daan has one good side, and that is that you can 
talk to her. Despite all her selfishness, stinginess, and underhandedness, you can make her give in easily, as long as you 
don’t irritate her and get on the wrong side of her. This way 
doesn’t work every time, but if you have patience you can try 
again and see how far you get. 

All the problems of our “upbringing,” of our being spoiled, 
the food— it could have been quite different if we’d remain 
perfectly open and friendly, and not always only -on the lookout for something to seize on. 

I know exactly what you’ll say, Kitty: “But, Anne, do these 
words really come from your lips? From you, who have had to 
listen to so many harsh words from the people upstairs, from 
you, the girl who has suffered so many injustices?” And yet 
they come from me. 

I want to start afresh and try to get to the bottom of it all, 
not be like the saying “the young always follow a bad example.” I want to examine the whole matter carefully myself and 
find out what is true and what is exaggerated. Then if I myself am disappointed in them, I can adopt the same line as 
Mummy and Daddy; if not, I shall try first of all to make them 
alter their ideas and if I don’t succeed I shall stick to my own 
opinions and judgment I shall seize every opportunity to discuss openly all our points of argument with Mrs. Van Daan 
and not be afraid of declaring myself neutral, even at the cost 

of being called a “know-all.” It is not that I shall be going 
against my own family, but from today there will be no more 
unkind gossip on my part. 

Until now I was immovable! I always thought the Van 
Daans were in the wrong, but we too are partly to blame We 
have certainly been right over the subject matter; but handling of others from intelligent people (which we consider 
ourselves to be!) one expects more insight. I hope that I have 
acquired a bit of insight and will use it well when the occasion 
arises. 

Yours, Anne 

Monday , 24 January , 1944 

Dear Kitty, 

Something has happened to me; or rather, I can hardly describe it as an event, except that I think it is pretty crazy. 
Whenever anyone used to speak of sexual problems at home 
or at school, it was something either mysterious or revolting. 
Woids which had any bearing on the subject were whispered, 
and often if someone didn’t understand he was laughed at. It 
struck me as very odd and I thought, “Why are people so 
secretive and tiresome when they talk about these things?” 
Rut as I didn’t think that I could change things, I kept my 
mouth shut as much as possible, or sometimes asked girl 
friends for information. When I had learned quite a lot and 
had also spoken about it with my parents, Mummy said one 
day, “Anne, let me give you some good advice; never speak 
about this subject to boys and don’t reply if they begin about 
it.” I remember exactly what my answer was: I said, “No, of 
course not! The very idea!” And there it remained. 

When we first came here, Daddy often told me about things 
that I would really have preferred to hear from Mummy, and 
I found out the rest from books and things I picked up from 
conversations. Peter Van Daan was never as tiresome over 
this as the boys at school— once or twice at first perhaps— but 
he never tried to get me talking. 


Mrs. Van Daan told us that she had never talked about 
these things to Peter, and for all she knew neither had her 
husband. Apparently she didn’t even know how much he 
knew. 

Yesterday, when Margot, Peter, and I were peeling potatoes, somehow the conversation turned to Boche. “We still 
don’t know what sex Boche is, do we?” I asked. 

“Yes, certainly,” Peter answered. “He’s a tom.” 

I began to laugh. “A tomcat that’s expecting, that’s marvelous!” 

Peter and Margot laughed too over this silly mistake. You 
see, two months ago, Peter had stated that Boche would soon 
be having a family, her tummy was growing visibly. However, 
the fatness appeared to come from the many stolen bones, 
because the children didn’t seem to grow fast, let alone make 
their appearance! 

Peter just had to defend himself. “No,” he said, “you can 
go with me yourself to look at him. Once when I was playing 
around with him, I noticed quite clearly that he’s a tom.” 

I couldn’t control my curiosity, and went with him to the 
warehouse. Boche, however, was not receiving visitors, and 
was nowhere to be seen. We waited for a while, began to get 
cold, and went upstairs again. Later in the afternoon I heard 
Peter go downstairs for the second time. I mustered up all my 
courage to walk through the silent house alone, and reached 
the warehouse. Boche stood on the packing table playing with 
Peter, who had just put him on the scales to weigh him. 

“Hello, do you want to see him?” He didn’t make any 
lengthy preparations, but picked up the animal, turned him 
over on to his back, deftly held his head and paws together, 
and the lesson began. “These are the male organs, these are 
just a few stray hairs, and that is his bottom.” The cat did 
another half turn and was standing on his white socks once 
more. 

If any other boy had shown me “the male organs,” I would 
never have looked at him again. But Peter went on talking 
quite normally on what is otherwise such a painful subject, 
without meaning anything unpleasant, and finally put me 

sufficiently at my ease for me to be normal too. We played 
with Boche, amused ourselves, chattered together, and then 
sauntered through the large warehouse towaids the door. 

“Usually, when I want to know something, I find it in some 
book or other, don t you?” I asked. 

“Why on earth? I just ask upstairs. My father knows more 
than me and has had more experience in such things.” 

We were already on the stair, so I kept my mouth shut after 
that. 

“Things may alter,” as Brer Rabbit said Yes. Really I 
shouldn’t have discussed these things in such a normal way 
with a girl. I know too definitely that Mummy didn’t mean it 
that way when she warned me not to discuss the subject with 
boys. I wasn’t quite my usual self for the rest of the day 
though, in spite of everything. When I thought over our talk, 
it still seemed rather odd. But at least I’m wiser about one 
thing, that there really are young people-and of the opposite 
sex too-who can discuss these things naturally without making fun of them. 

I wonder if Peter really does ask his parents much. Would 
he honestly behave with them as he did with me yesterday? 
Ah, what would I know about it! 

Yours, Anne 

Thursday , 27 January , 1944 

Dear Kitty, 

Lately I have developed a great love for family trees and 
genealogical tables of the royal families, and have come to the 
conclusion that, once you begin, you want to delve still deeper 
into the past, and can keep on making fresh and interesting 
discoveries. Although I am extraordinarily industrious over my 
lessons, and can already follow the English Home Service 
quite well on the wireless, I still devote many Sundays to sorting and looking over my large collection of film stars, which is 
quite a respectable size by now. 

I am awfully pleased whenever Mr. Kraler brings the 


Cinema and Theater with him on Mondays. Although this 
little gift is often called a waste of money by the less worldly 
members of the household, they are amazed each time at how 
accurately I can state who is in a certain film, even after a 
year. Elk, who, on her days off, often goes to the movies with 
her boy friend, tells me the titles of the new films each week; 
and in one breath I rattle off the names of the stars who appear m them, together with what the reviews say. Not so long 
ago, Mum said that I wouldn't need to go to a cinema later on 
because I knew the plots, the names of the stars, and the 
opinions of the reviews all by heart. 

If ever I come sailing in with a new hair style, they all look 
disapprovingly at me, and I can be quite sure that someone 
will ask which glamorous star I’m supposed to be imitating. 
They only half beheve me if I reply that it's my own invention. 

But to continue about the hair style — it doesn't stay put for 
more than half an hour; then I’m so tired of the remarks people pass that I quickly hasten to the bathroom and restore my 
ordinary house-garden-kitchen hair style. 

Yours, Anne