Thursday , 11 November, 1943

Dear Kitty, 

I have a good title for this chapter: 

ODE TO MY FOUNTAIN FEN 
m MEMORIAM 

My fountain pen has always been one of my most priceless possessions; I value it highly, especially for its thick nib, 
for I can only really write neatly with a thick mb. My fountain pen has had a very long and interesting pen-life, which 
I will briefly tell you about. 

When I was nine, my fountain pen arrived in a packet 
(wrapped in cotton wool) as “sample without value” all the 
way from Aachen, where my Grandmother, the kind donor, 
used to live. I was in bed with flu, while February winds 
howled round the house. The glorious fountain pen had a 
red leather case and was at once shown around to all my 
friends. I, Anne Frank, the proud owner of a fountain pen! 
When I was ten I was allowed to take the pen to school and 
the mistress went so far as to permit me to write with it. 

When I was eleven, however, my treasure had to be put 
away again, because the mistress in the sixth form only 
allowed us to use school pens and inkpots. 

When I was twelve and went to the Jewish Lyceum , 1 my 

type of secondary school specializing in the classics, common in most 
continental countries. 


fountain pen received a new case in honor of the great occasion; it could take a pencil as well, and as it closed with a 
zipper looked much more impressive. 

At thirteen the fountain pen came with us to the "Secret 
Annexe,” where it has raced through countless diaries and 
compositions for me. 

Now I am fourteen, we have spent our last year together. 

It was on a Friday afternoon after five o'clock. I had 
come out of my room and wanted to go and sit at the table 
to write, when I was roughly pushed on one side and had 
to make room for Margot and Daddy, who wanted to practice their "Latin.” The fountain pen remained on the table 
unused while, with a sigh, its owner contented herself with 
a tiny little comer of the table and started rubbing beans. 
"Bean rubbing” is making moldy beans decent again. I 
swept the floor at a quarter to six and threw the dirt, together with the bad beans, into a newspaper and into the 
stove. A terrific flame leaped out and I thought it was grand 
that the fire should bum up so well when it was practically 
out All was quiet again, the “Latinites” had finished, and 
I went and sat at the table to clear up my writing things, 
but look as I might, my fountain pen was nowhere to be 
seen. I looked again, Margot looked, but there was not a trace 
of the thing, "Perhaps it fell into the stove together with 
the beans,” Margot suggested. "Oh, no, of course not!” I 
answered. When my fountain pen didn't turn up that 
evening, however, we all took it that it had been burned, 
all the more as celluloid is terribly inflammable. 

And so it was, our unhappy fears were confirmed; when 
Daddy did the stove the following morning the clip used for 
fastening was found among the ashes. Not a trace of the gold 
nib was found. "Must have melted and stuck to some stone or 
other,” Daddy thought. 

I have one consolation, although a slender one: my fountain 
pen has been cremated, just what I want later! 

Yours, Anne 



Wednesday , 17 November , 194S 

Dear Kitty, 

Shattering things are happening. Diphtheria reigns in EUfs 
home, so she is not allowed to come into contact with us for 
six weeks. It makes it very awkward over food and shopping, 
not to mention missing her companionship. Koophuis is still in 
bed and has had nothing but porridge and milk for three 
weeks. Kraler is frantically busy. 

The Latin lessons Margot sends in are corrected by a 
teacher and returned, Margot writing in EHi's name. The 
teacher is very nice, and witty, too. I expect he is glad to have 
such a clever pupil. 

Dussel is very put out, none of us knows why. It began by 
his keeping his mouth closed upstairs; he didn't utter a word 
to either Mr. or Mrs. Van Daan. Everyone was struck by it, 
and when it lasted a couple of days, Mummy took the opportunity of warning him about Mrs. Van Daan, who, if he went 
on like this, could make things very disagreeable for him. 

Dussel said that Mr. Van Daan started the silence, so he 
was not going to be the one to break it. 

Now I must tell you that yesterday was the sixteenth of 
November, the day he had been exactly one year in the “Secret 
Annexe.” Mummy received a plant in honor of the occasion, 
but Mrs. Van Daan, who for weeks beforehand had made no 
bones about the fact that she thought Dussel should treat us 
to something, received nothing. 

Instead of expressing, for die first time, his thanks for our 
unselfishness in taking him in, he didn't say a word. And when 
I asked him, on the morning of the sixteenth, whether I should 
congratulate or condole, he answered that it didn't matter to 
him. Mummy, who wanted to act as peacemaker, didn't get 
one step further, and finally the situation remained as it was. 

Der Man hat einen grossen Geist 
Und ist so Hein von TatenI 1 

Yours, Anne 

1 (The spirit of the man is great, 

"How puny are his deeds ! ) 


Saturday , 27 November , 194S 

Dear Kitty, 

Yesterday evening, before I fell asleep, who should suddenly appear before my eyes but Lies! 

I saw her in front of me, clothed in rags, her face thin and 
worn. Her eyes were very big and she looked so sadly and 
reproachfully at me that I could read in her eyes: “Oh, Anne, 
why have you deserted me? Help, oh, help me, rescue me 
from this hell!” 

And I cannot help her, I can only look on, how others suffer 
and die, and can only pray to God to send her back to us. 

I just saw Lies, no one else, and now I understand. I misjudged her and was too young to understand her difficulties. 
She was attached to a new girl friend, and to her it seemed 
as though I wanted to take her away. What the poor girl must 
have felt like, I know; I know the feeling so well myself! 

Sometimes, in a flash, I saw something of her life, but a 
moment later I was selfishly absorbed again in my own pleasures and problems. It was horrid of me to treat her as I did, 
and now she looked at me, oh so helplessly, with her pale face 
and imploring eyes. If only I could help her! 

Oh, God, that I should have all I could wish for and that 
she should be seized by such a terrible fate. I am not more 
virtuous than she; she, too, wanted to do what was right, why 
should I be chosen to live and she probably to die? What was 
the difference between us? Why are we so far from each other 
now? 

Quite honestly, I haven't thought about her for months, yes, 
almost for a year. Not completely forgotten her, but still I had 
never thought about her like this, until I saw her before me in 
all her misery. 

Oh, Lies, I hope that, if you live until the end of the war, 
you will come back to us and that I shall be able to take you 
in and do something to make up for the wrong I did you. 

But when I am able to help her again, then she will not 
need my help so badly as now. I wonder if she ever thinks of 
me; if so, what would she feel? 



Good Lord, defend her, so that at least she is not alone. Oh, 
if only You could tell her that I think lovingly of her and with 
sympathy, perhaps that would give her greater endurance. 

I must not go on thinking about it, because I don’t get any 
further. I only keep seeing her great big eyes, and cannot free 
myself from them. I wonder if Lies has real faith in herself, 
and not only what has been thrust upon her? 

I don’t even know, I never took the trouble to ask her! 

Lies, Lies, if only I could take you away, if only I could let 
you share all the things I enjoy. It is too late now, I can’t help, 
or repair the wrong I have done. Rut I shall never forget her 
again, and I shall always pray for her. 

Yours, Anne 

Monday, 6 December , 1943 

Dear Kitty, 

When St Nicholas’ Day approached, none of us could help 
thinking of the prettily decorated basket we had last year and 
I, especially, thought it would be very dull to do nothing at all 
this year. I thought a long time about it, until I invented something, something funny. 

I consulted Pim, and a week ago we started composing a 
little poem for each person. 

On Sunday evening at a quarter to eight we appeared upstairs with the large laundry basket between us, decorated 
with little figures, and bows of pink and blue carbon copy 
paper. The basket was covered with a large piece of brown 
paper, on which a letter was pinned. Everyone was rather 
astonished at the size of the surprise package. 

I took the letter from the paper and read; 

“ Santa Clam has come once more. 

Though not quite as he came before ; 

We cant celebrate his day 

In last year's fine and pleasant way. 

For then our hopes were high and bright, 

All the optimists seemed right, 


None supposing that this year 
We would welcome Santa here . 

Still, well make his spirit live, 

And since we’ve nothing left to give, 

We’ve thought of something else to do 
Each please look inside his shoe 

As each owner took his shoe from the basket there was a 
resounding peal of laughter. A little paper package lay in each 
shoe with the address of the shoe’s owner on it. 

Yours, Anne