Sunday , 27 February, 1944

Dearest Kitty, 

From early in the morning till late at night, I really do 
hardly anything else but think of Peter. I sleep with his image 
before my eyes, dream about him and he is still looking at me 
when I awake. 


I Rave a strong feeling that Peter and I are really not so 
different as we would appear to be, and I will tell you why. 
We both lack a mother. His is too superficial, loves flirting 
and doesn’t trouble much about what he thinks. Mine does 
bother about me, but lacks sensitiveness, real motherliness. 

Peter and I both wrestle with our inner feelings, we are still 
uncertain and are really too sensitive to be roughly treated. 
If we are, then my reaction is to “get away from it all.” But as 
that is impossible, I hide my feelings, throw my weight about 
the place, am noisy and boisterous, so that everyone wishes 
that I was out of the way. 

He, on the contrary, shuts himself up, hardly talks at all, 
is quiet, day-dreams and in his way carefully conceals his true 
self. 

But how and when will we finally reach each other? I don’t 
know quite how long my common sense will keep this longing under control. 

Yours, Anne 

Monday , 28 February , 1944 

Dearest Kitty, 

It is becoming a bad dream-in daytime as well as at night. 
I see him nearly all the time and can’t get at him, I mustn’t 
show anything, must remain gay while I’m really in despair. 

Peter Wessel and Peter Van Daan have grown into one 
Peter, who is beloved and good, and for whom I long 
desperately. 

Mummy is tiresome, Daddy sweet and therefore all the 
more tiresome, Margot the most tiresome because she expects 
me to wear a pleasant expression; and all I want is to be left 
in peace. 

Peter didn’t come to me in the attic. He went up to the loft 
instead and did some carpentry. At every creak and every 
knock some of my courage seemed to seep away and I giew 
more unhappy. In the distance a bell was playing “Pure in 



body, pure in soul.” 1 I’m sentimental-I know. I’m desperate 
and silly-I know that too. Oh, help me! 

Yours, Anne 

Wednesday , 1 March , 1944 

Dear Kitty, 

My own affairs have been pushed into the background by 
-a burglary. I’m becoming boring with all my burglars, but 
what can I do, they seem to take such a delight in honoring 
Kolen & Co. with their visits. This burglary is much more 
complicated than the one in July 1943. 

When Mr. Van Daan went to Kraler s office at half past 
seven, as usual, he saw that the communicating glass doors 
and the office door were open. Surprised at this, he walked 
through and was even more amazed to see that the doors of 
the little dark room were open too, and that there was a terrible mess in the main office. “There has been a burglar,” he 
thought to himself at once, and to satisfy himself he went 
straight downstairs to look at the front door, felt the Yale 
lock, and found everything closed. “Oh, then both Peter and 
Elli must have been very slack this evening,” he decided. He 
remained in Kraler’s room for a while, then switched off the 
lamp, and went upstairs, without worrying much about either 
the open doors or the untidy office. 

This morning Peter knocked at our door early and came 
with the not so pleasant news that the front door was wide 
open. He also told us that the projector and Kraler’s new 
portfolio had both disappeared from the cupboard. Peter was 
told to close the door. Van Daan told us of his discoveries 
the previous evening and we were all awfully worried. 

What must have happened is that the thief had a skeleton 
key, because the lock was quite undamaged. He must have 
crept into the house quite early and closed the door behind 
him, hidden himself when disturbed by Mr. Van Daan, and 

l The bells in old dock towers play tunes. 



when he departed fled with his spoils, leaving the door open 
in his haste. Who can have our key? Why didn’t the thief go 
to the warehouse? Might it be one of our own warehousemen, and would he perhaps betray us, since he certainly 
heard Van Daan and perhaps even saw him? 

It is all very creepy, because we don’t know whether this 
same burglar may not take it into his head to visit us again. 
Or perhaps it gave him a shock to find that there was someone walking about in the house? 

Yours, Anne 

Thursday , 2 

Dear Kitty, 

Margot and I were both up in the attic today; although we 
were not able to enjoy it together as I had imagined, still I do 
know that she shares my feelings over most things. 

During dish washing Elli began telling Mummy and Mrs. 
Van Daan that she felt very discouraged at times. And what 
help do you think they gave her? Do you know what 
Mummy’s advice was? She should try to think of all the 
other people who are in trouble! What is the good of thinking of misery when one is already miserable oneself? I said 
this too and was told, “You keep out of this sort of conversation ” 

Aren’t the grownups idiotic and stupid? Just as if Peter, 
Margot, Elli, and I don’t all feel the same about things, and 
only a mother’s love or that of a very, very good friend can 
help us. These mothers here just don’t understand us at all. 
Perhaps Mrs. Van Daan does a little more than Mummy. Oh, 
I would have so liked to say something to poor Elli, something that I know from experience would have helped her. 
But Daddy came between us and pushed me aside. 

Aren’t they all stupid! We aren’t allowed to have any 
opinions. People can tell you to keep your mouth shut, but 
it doesn’t stop you having your own opinion. Even if people 
are still very young, they shouldn’t be prevented from saying 
what they think. 



Only great love and devotion can help Elli, Margot, Peter, 
and me, and none of us gets it. And no one, especially the 
stupid “know-alls” here, can understand us, because we are 
much more sensitive and much more advanced in our 
thoughts than anyone here would ever imagine m their wildest dreams. 

Mummy is grumbling again at the moment-she is obviously jealous because I talk more to Mrs. Van Daan than to 
her nowadays. 

I managed to get hold of Peter this afternoon and we talked 
for at least three quarters of an hour. Peter had the greatest 
difficulty in saying anything about himself, it took a long 
time to draw him out. He told me how often his parents 
quarrel over politics, cigarettes, and all kinds of things. He 
was very shy. 

Then I talked to him about my parents. He defended 
Daddy: he thought him a “first-rate chap.” Then we talked 
about “upstairs” and “downstairs” again; he was really rather 
amazed that we don’t always like his parents. “Peter,” I said, 
“you know Im always honest, so why shouldn’t I tell you 
that we can see their faults too.” And among other things I 
also said, “I would so like to help you, Peter; can’t I? You 
are in such an awkward position and, although you don’t 
say anything, it doesn’t mean that you don’t care.” 

“Oh, I would always welcome your help.” 

“Perhaps you would do better to go to Daddy, he wouldn’t 
let anything go any further, take it from me; you can easily 
tell him!” 

“Yes, he is a real pal.” 

“You’re very fond of him, aren’t you?” Peter nodded and 
I went on: “And he is of you tool” 

He looked up quickly and blushed, it was really moving 
to see how these few words pleased him. 

“Do you think so?” he asked. 

“Yes,” I said, “you can easily tell by little things that slip 
out now and then!” 

Peter is a first-rate chap, too, just like Daddy! 

Yours, Anne 



Friday , 3 March , 1944 

Deal Kitty, 

When I looked into the candle this evening 1 I felt calm 
and happy. Oma seems to be in the candle and it is Oma too 
who shelters and protects me and who always makes me feel 
happy again. 

Rut . . . there is someone else who governs all my moods 
and that is . . . Peter. When I went up' to get potatoes today 
and was still standing on the stepladder with the pan, he at 
once asked, “What have you been doing since lunch?” I 
went and sat on the steps and we started talking. At a quarter past five (an hour later) the potatoes, which had been 
sitting on the floor in the meantime, finally reached their 
destinations. 

Peter didn’t say another word about his parents; we just 
talked about books and about the past. The boy has such 
warmth in his eyes; I believe I’m pretty near to being in love 
with him. He talked about that this evening. I went into his 
room, after peeling the potatoes, and said that I felt so hot. 

“You can tell what the temperature is by Margot and me; 
if it’s cold we are white, and if it is hot we are red in the 
face,” I said. 

“In love' 5 ” he asked. 

“Why should I be m love?” My answer was rather silly. 

“Why not?” he said, and then we had to go for supper. 

Would he have meant anything by that question? I finally 
managed to ask him today whether he didn’t find my chatter 
a nuisance; he only said: “It’s okay, I like it!” 

To what extent this answer was just shyness, I am not able 
to judge. 

Kitty, I’m just like someone in love, who can only talk 
about her darling. And Peter really is a darling. When shall 
I be able to tell him so? Naturally, only if he thinks I’m a 
darling too. But I’m quite capable of looking after myself, 
and he knows that very well. And he likes his tranquillity, 
so I have no idea how much he likes me. In any case, we are 

Un Jewish homes candles are ht on the Sabbath eve. 



getting to know each other a bit. I wish we dared to tell each 
other much more already. Who knows, the time may come 
sooner than I think! I get an understanding look from him 
about twice a day, I wink back, and we both feel happy. 

I certainly seem quite mad to be talking about him being 
happy, and yet I feel pretty sure that he thinks just the same 
as I do. 

Yours, Anne 

Saturday , 4 March , 1944 

Dear Kitty, 

This is the first Saturday for months and months that 
hasn't been boring, dreary, and dull. And Peter is the cause. 

This morning I went to the attic to hang up my apron, 
when Daddy asked whether I'd like to stay and talk some 
French. I agreed. First we talked French, and I explained 
something to Peter; then we did some English. Daddy read 
out loud to us from Dickens and I was in the seventh heaven, 
because I sat on Daddy's chair very close to Peter. 

I went downstairs at eleven o'clock. When I came upstairs 
again at half past eleven, he was already waiting for me on 
the stairs. We talked until a quarter to one. If, as I leave the 
room, he gets a chance after a meal, for instance, and if 
no one can hear, he says: “Good-by, Anne, see you soon." 

Oh, I am so pleased! I wonder if he is going to fall in love 
with me after all? Anyway, he is a very nice fellow and no 
one knows what lovely talks I have with him! 

Mrs. Van Daan quite approves when I go and talk to him, 
but she asked today teasingly, “Can I really trust you two up 
there together?” 

“Of course,” I protested, “really you quite insult me!” 

From morn till night I look forward to seeing Peter. 

Yours, Anne 



Monday , 6 March , 1944 

Dear Kitty, 

I can tell by Peters face that be thinks just as much as I 
do, and when Mrs. Van Daan yesterday evening said scoffingiy; “The thinker!” I was irritated. Peter flushed and 
looked very embarrassed, and I was about to explode. 

Why can't these people keep their mouths shut? 

You can't imagine how horrible it is to stand by and see 
how lonely he is and yet not be able to do anything. I can 
so well imagine, just as if I were in his place, how desperate 
he must feel sometimes in quarrels and in love. Poor Peter, 
he needs love very much! 

When he said he didn't need any friends how harsh the 
words sounded to my ears. Oh, how mistaken he is! I don’t 
bebeve he meant it a bit. 

He clings to his solitude, to his affected indifference and his 
grown-up ways, but it’s just an act, so as never, never to show 
his real feelings. Poor Peter, how long will he be able to go 
on playing this role? Surely a terrible outburst must follow as 
the result of this superhuman effort? 

Oh, Peter, if only I could help you, if only you would let 
me 1 Together we could drive away your loneliness and mine! 

I think a lot, but I don’t say much. I am happy if I see 
him and if the sun shines when I’m with him. I was very 
excited yesterday; while I was washing my hair, I knew that 
he was sitting in the room next to ours. I couldn’t do anything about it; the more quiet and senous I feel inside, the 
more noisy I become outwardly. 

Who will be the first to discover and break through this 
armor? I’m glad after all that the Van Daans have a son 
and not a daughter, my conquest could never have been so 
difficult, so beautiful, so good, if I had not happened to hit 
on someone of the opposite sex. 

Yours, Anne 

P.S. You know that I’m always honest with you, so I must 
tell you that I actually live from one meeting to the next 



I keep hoping to discover that he too is waiting for me all 
the time and Im thrilled if I notice a small shy advance 
from his side. I believe he’d like to say a lot just like I would; 
little does he know that it’s just his clumsiness that attracts 
me. 

Yours, Anne