Tuesday , 17 November, 1942

Dear Kitty, 

Dussel has arrived. All went well. Miep had told him that 
he must be at a special place in front of the Post Office at 
eleven o’clock, where a man would meet him. Dussel was 

standing at the rendezvous dead on time. Mr. Koophuis, who 
knows Dussel too, went up to him and told him that the said 
gentleman could not come, but asked whether he would just 
go to Miep at the office. Koophuis got into a tram and went 
back to the office, while Dussel walked in the same direction. 
At twenty past eleven Dussel tapped at the office door. Miep 
helped him off with his coat, so that the yellow star would not 
be seen, and took him to the private office, where Koophuis 
engaged him in conversation until the charwoman had gone. 
Then Miep went upstairs with Dussel under the pretext that 
the private office was needed for something, opened the 
swinging cupboard, and stepped inside before the eyes of the 
dumfounded Dussel. 

We all sat around the table upstairs, waiting with coffee 
and cognac to greet the newcomer. Miep showed him into 
our sitting room first. He recognized our furniture at once, 
and had not the remotest idea that we were there, above his 
head. When Miep told him he nearly passed out with surprise. But luckily Miep didn’t give him much time and took 
him straight upstairs. 

Dussel sank into a chair, speechless, and looked at us all 
for a while, as if he had to really take it all in first. After a 
while he stuttered “But . . . aber, sind you not in Belgium 
then? 1st der Militar nicht come, das Auto, the escape is sie 
nicht successful?” 

We explained everything to him, that we had spread the 
story about the soldiers and the car on purpose to put people, 
and especially the Germans, on the wrong track, should they 
try to find us. 

Dussel was again struck dumb by such ingenuity and, when 
he had explored further our superpractical exquisite little 
“Secret Annexe,” he could do nothing but gaze about him in 
astonishment. 

We all had lunch together. Then he had a little nap and 
joined us for tea, tidied up his things a bit (Miep had brought 
them beforehand), and began to feel more at home. Especially when he received the following typed “Secret Annexe 
Rules” (Van Daan product). 

ANNE FRANK 

PROSPECTUS AND GUIDE TO THE “SECRET ANNEXE* 



Special institution as temporary residence 
for Jews and suchlike 

Open all the year round. Beautiful, quiet, free from woodland 
surroundings, m the heart of Amsterdam. Can be reached 
by trams 13 and 17, also by car or bicycle. In special cases 
also on foot, if the Germans prevent the use of transport. 

Board and lodging: Free. 

Special fat-free diet. 

Running water in the bathroom (alas, no bath) and down various 
inside and outside walls. 

Ample storage room for all types of goods. 

Own radio center , direct communication with London, New 
York, Tel Aviv, and numerous other stations. This appliance is only for residents’ use after six o’clock m the evening No stations are forbidden, on the understanding that 
German stations are only listened to in special cases, such 
as classical music and the like. 

Rest houis: 10 o’clock in the evening until 7:30 in the morning. 
10*15 on Sundays. Residents may rest during the day, conditions permitting, as the directors indicate For reasons of 
public security rest hours must be strictly observed! I 

Holidays (outside the home): postponed indefinitely. 

Use of language . Speak softly at all times, by order! All civilized 
languages are permitted, therefore no German! 

Lessons: One written shorthand lesson per week. English, French, 
Mathematics, and History at all times. 

Small Pets-Special Department (permit is necessary): Good 
treatment available (vermin excepted). 

Mealtimes: breakfast, every day except Sundays and Bank Holidays, 9 am Sundays and Bank Holidays, 11:30 a.m. approximately. 

Lunch: (not very big): 1:15 p.m. to 1*45 pm. 

Dimer: cold and/or hot: no fixed time (depending on the news 
broadcast). 

Duties: Residents must always be ready to help with office work. 

Baths. The washtub is available for all residents from 9 am. on 
Sundays. The W.C. kitchen, private office or mam office, 
whichever preferred, are available. 

Alcoholic Beverages: only with doctor’s prescription. 

END 

Yours, Anne 

Thursday , 19 November ■, 1942 

Dear Kitty, 

Dussel is a very nice man, just as we had all imagined. Of 
course he thought it was all right to share my little room. 

Quite honestly Fm not so keen that a stranger should use 
my things, but one must be prepared to make some sacrifices 
for a good cause, so I shall make my little offering with a good 
will. "If we can save someone, then everything else is of secondary importance,” says Daddy, and he's absolutely right. 

The first day that Dussel was here, he immediately asked 
me all sorts of questions: When does the charwoman come? 
When can one use the bathroom? When is one allowed to 
use the lavatory? You may laugh, but these things are not so 
simple in a hiding place. During the day we mustn't make 
any noise that might be heard downstairs; and if there is some 
stranger-such as the charwoman for example— then we have 
to be extra careful. I explained all this carefully to Dussel. 
But one thing amazed me; he is very slow on the uptake. He 
asks everything twice over and still doesn’t seem to remember. Perhaps that will wear off in time, and its only that he's 
thoroughly upset by the sudden change. 

Apart from that, all goes well. Dussel has told us a lot 
about the outside world, which we have missed for so long 
now. He had very sad news. Countless friends and acquaintances have gone to a terrible fate. Evening after evening the 
green and gray army lorries trundle past. The Germans ring 
at every front door to inquire if there are any Jews living in 
the house. If there are, then the whole family has to go at 
once If they don’t find any, they go on to the next house. No 
one has a chance of evading them unless one goes into hiding. Often they go around with lists, and only ring when they 
know they can get a good haul. Sometimes they let them off 
for cash— so much per head. It seems like the slave hunts of 
olden times. But it’s certainly no joke; it’s much too tragic 
for that. In the evenings when it’s dark, I often see rows of 
good, innocent people accompanied by crying children, walking on and on, in charge of a couple of these chaps, bullied 


and knocked about until they almost drop. No on© is spared 
—old people, babies, expectant mothers, the sick— each and 
all join in the march of death. 

How fortunate we are here, so well cared for and undisturbed. We wouldn't have to worry about all this misery were 
it not that we are so anxious about all those dear to us whom 
we can no longer help. 

I feel wicked sleeping in a warm bed, while my dearest 
friends have been knocked down or have fallen into a gutter 
somewhere out in the cold night. I get frightened when I 
think of close friends who have now been delivered into the 
hands of the crudest brutes that walk the earth. And all because they are Jewsl 

Yours, Anne 

Friday , 20 November , 1942 

Dear Kitty, 

None of us really knows how to take it all. The news about 
the Jews had not really penetrated through to us until now, 
and we thought it best to remain as cheerful as possible. 
Every now and then, when Miep lets out something about 
what has happened to a friend, Mummy and Mrs. Van Daan 
always begin to cry, so Miep thinks it better not to tell us any 
more. But Dussel was immediately plied with questions from 
all sides, and the stories he told us were so gruesome and 
dreadful that one can’t get them out of one’s mind. 

Yet we shall still have our jokes and tease each other, when 
these horrors have faded a bit in our minds. It won’t do us 
any good, or help those outside, to go on being as gloomy as 
we are at the moment. And what would be the object of making our “Secret Annexe” into a “Secret Annexe of Gloom”? 
Must I keep thinking about those other people, whatever I 
am doing? And if I want to laugh about something, should I 
stop myself quickly and feel ashamed that I am cheerful? 
Ought I then to cry the whole day long? No, that I can’t do. 
Besides, in time this gloom will wear off. 

Added to this misery there is another, but of a purely per

sonal kind; and it pales into insignificance beside all the 
wretchedness I’ve just told you about. Still, I can't refrain 
from telling you that lately I have begun to feel deserted. I 
am surrounded by too great a void. I never used to feel like 
this, my fun and amusements, and my girl friends, completely 
filled my thoughts. Now I either think about unhappy things, 
or about myself. And at long last I have made the discovery 
that Daddy, although he’s such a darling, still cannot take 
the place of my entire little world of bygone days. But why 
do I bother you with such foolish things? I’m very ungrateful, Kitty; I know that. But it often makes my head swim if 
I’m jumped upon too much, and then on top of that have to 
think about all those other miseries! 

Yours, Anne 

Saturday , 28 November , 1942 

Dear Kitty, 

We have used too much electricity, more than our ration. 
Result: the utmost economy and the prospect of having it 
cut off. No light for a fortnight; a pleasant thought, that, but 
who knows, perhaps it won’t happen after all! It’s too dark to 
read in the afternoons after four or half past. We pass the 
time in all sorts of crazy ways: asking riddles, physical training in the dark, talking English and French, criticizing books. 
But it all begins to pall in the end. Yesterday evening I discovered something new: to peer through a powerful pair of 
field glasses into the lighted rooms of the houses at the back. 
In the daytime we can’t allow even as much as a centimeter’s 
chink to appear between our curtains, but it can’t do any 
harm after dark. I never knew before that neighbors could he 
such interesting people. At any rate, ours are. I found one 
couple having a meal, one family was in the act of taking a 
home movie; and the dentist opposite was just attending to 
an old lady, who was awfully scared. 

It was always said about Mr. Dussel that he could get on 
wonderfully with children and that he loved them all. Now 


he shows himself in his true colors; a stodgy, old-fashioned 
disciplinarian, and preacher of long, drawn-out sermons on 
manners. 

As I have the unusual good fortune (!) to share my bedroom— alas, a small one— with His Lordship, and as Fm generally considered to be the most badly behaved of the three 
young people, I have a lot to put up with and have to pretend 
to be deaf in order to escape the old, much-repeated tickingsoff and warnings. All this wouldn’t be too bad, if he wasn’t 
such a frightful sneak and he didn’t pick on Mummy of all 
people to sneak to every time. When I’ve already just had a 
dose from him, Mummy goes over it all again, so I get a gale 
aft as well as fore. Then, if I’m really lucky, I’m called on to 
give an account of myself to Mrs. Van Daan and then I get 
a veritable hurricane! 

Honestly, you needn’t think it’s easy to be the “badly 
brought-up” central figure of a hypercritical family m hiding. 
When I lie in bed at night and think over the many sms and 
shortcomings attributed to me, I get so confused by it all that 
I either laugh or cry: it depends what sort of mood I am m. 

Then I fall asleep with a stupid feeling of wishing to be 
different from what I am or from what I want to be; peihaps 
to behave differently from the way I want to behave, or do 
behave. Oh, heavens above, now I’m getting you m a muddle 
too. Forgive me, but I don’t like crossing Sungs out, and in 
these days of paper shortage we are not allowed to throw 
paper away. Therefore I can only advise you not to read the 
last sentence again, and certainly not to try to understand it, 
because you won’t succeed anyhow! 

Yours, Anne