Monday , 28 September, 1942

Dear Kitty, 

I had to stop yesterday, long before I’d finished. I just must 
tell you about another quarrel, but before I start on that, 
something else. 

Why do grownups quarrel so easily, so much, and over the 
most idiotic things? Up till now I thought that only children 
squabbled and that that wore off as you grew up. Of course, 
there is sometimes a real reason for a quarrel, but this is just 
plain bickering. I suppose I should get used to it. But I can’t 
nor do I think I shall, as long as I am the subject of nearly 
every discussion (they use the word “discussion” instead of 
quarrel). Nothing, I repeat, nothing about me is right; my 
general appearance, my character, my manners are discussed 
from A to Z. I’m expected (by order) to simply swallow all 
the harsh words and shouts in silence and I am not used to 
this. In fact, I can t! I’m not going to take all these insults
lying down, I’ll show them that Anne Frank wasn’t born
yesterday. Then they’ll be surprised and perhaps they’ll keep their 
mouths shut when I let them see that I am going to start
educating them. Shall I take up that attitude? Plain barbarism! I’m 
simply amazed again and again over their awful manners and 
especially . . . stupidity (Mrs. Van Daan’s), but as soon as I 
get used to this-and it won’t be long-then I’ll give them some 
of their own back, and no half measures. Then they’ll change 
their tune! 

Am I really so bad-mannered, conceited, headstrong,
pushing, stupid, lazy, etc., etc., as they all say? Oh, of course not. 
I have my faults, just like everyone else, I know that, but they 
thoroughly exaggerate everything. 

Kitty, if only you knew how I sometimes boil under so many 
gibes and jeers. And I don't know how long I shall be able to 
stifle my rage. I shall just blow up one day. 

Still, no more of this, I’ve bored you long enough with all 
these quarrels. But I simply must tell you of one highly
interesting discussion at table. Somehow or other, we got on to the 
subject of Pirn’s (Daddy’s nickname) extreme modesty. Even 
the most stupid people have to admit this about Daddy.
Suddenly Mrs. Van Daan says, “I too, have an unassuming nature, 
more so than my husband.” 

Did you ever! This sentence in itself shows quite clearly 
how thoroughly forward and pushing she is! Mr. Van Daan 
thought he ought to give an explanation regarding the
reference to himself. “I don't wish to be modest— in my experience 
it does not pay.” Then to me: “Take my advice, Anne, don’t 
be too unassuming, it doesn’t get you anywhere.” 

Mummy agreed with this too. But Mrs. Van Daan had to 
add, as always, her ideas on the subject. Her next remark was 
addressed to Mummy and Daddy. “You have a strange outlook on life. Fancy saying such a thing to Anne; it was very 
different when I was young. And I feel sure that it still is,
except in your modem home.” This was a direct hit at the way 
Mummy brings up her daughters. 

Mrs. Van Daan was scarlet by this time. Mummy calm and 
cool as a cucumber. People who blush get so hot and excited, 
it is quite a handicap in such a situation. Mummy, still entirely 
unruffled, but anxious to close the conversation as soon as
possible, thought for a second and then said: “I find, too, Mrs. 
Van Daan, that one gets on better in life if one is not
over-modest. My husband, now, and Margot, and Peter are exceptionally modest, whereas your husband, Anne, you, and I, 
though not exactly the opposite, don’t allow ourselves to be 
completely pushed to one side.” Mrs. Van Daan: “But, Mrs. 
Frank, I don’t understand you; I’m so very modest and retiring, 
how can you think of calling me anything else?” Mummy: “I 
did not say you were exactly forward, but no one could say 
yon had a retiring disposition.” Mrs. Van Daan: “Let us get this 
matter cleared up, once and for all. I’d like to know in what 
way I am pushing? I know one thing, if I didn’t look after myself,
I’d soon be starving.” 

This absurd remark in self-defense just made Mummy rock 
with laughter. That irritated Mrs. Van Daan, who added a 
string of German-Dutch, Dutch-German expressions, until she 
became completely tongue-tied; then she rose from her chair 
and was about to leave the room. 

Suddenly her eye fell on me. You should have seen her. Unfortunately, at the very moment that she turned round, I was 
shaking my head sorrowfully-not on purpose, but quite involuntarily, for I had been following the whole conversation 
so closely. 

Mrs. Van Daan turned round and began to reel off a lot of 
harsh German, common, and ill-mannered, just like a coarse, 
red-faced fishwife— it was a marvelous sight. If I could draw, 
I’d have liked to catch her like this; it was a scream, such a 
stupid, foolish little person! 

Anyhow, I’ve learned one thing now. You only really get to 
know people when you’ve had a jolly good row with them. 
Then and then only can you judge their true characters! 

Yours, Anne 

Tuesday, 29 September , 1942 

Dear Kitty, 

Extraordinary things can happen to people who go into
hiding. Just imagine, as there is no bath, we use a washtub and 
because there is hot water m the office (by which I always 
mean the whole of the lower floor) all seven of us take it in 
turns to make use of this great luxury. 

But because we are all so different and some are more
modest than others, each member of the family has found his own 
place for carrying out the performance. Peter uses the kitchen 
in spite of its glass door When he is going to have a bath, he 
goes to each one of us in turn and tells us that we must not 
walk past the kitchen for half an hour. He seems to think this 
is sufficient. Mr. Van Daan goes right upstairs; to him it is 
worth the bother of carrying hot water all that way, so as to 
have the seclusion of his own room. Mrs. Van Daan simply 
doesn't bathe at all at present; she is waiting to see which is 
the best place. Daddy has his bath in the private office, Mummy behind a fire guard in the kitchen; Margot and I have 
chosen the front office for our scrub. The curtains there are 
drawn on Saturday afternoons, so we wash ourselves in semidarkness. 

However, I don't like this place any longer, and since last 
week I've been on the lookout for more comfortable quarters. 
Peter gave me an idea and that was to try the large office 
W.C. There I can sit down, have the light on, lock the door, 
pour my own bath water away, and I'm safe from prying eyes. 

I tried my beautiful bathroom on Sunday for the first time 
and although it sounds mad, I think it is the best place of all. 
Last week the plumber was at work downstairs to move the 
drains and water pipes from the office W.C. to the passage. 
This change is a precaution against frozen pipes, in case we 
should have a cold winter. The plumber's visit was far from 
pleasant for us. Not only were we unable to draw water the 
whole day, but we could not go to the W.C. either. Now it is 
rather indecent to tell you what we did to overcome this
difficulty, however, I'm not such a prude that I can't talk about 
these things. 

The day we arrived here, Daddy and I improvised a pottie 
for ourselves; not having a better receptacle, we sacrificed a 
glass preserving jar for this purpose. During the plumbers 
visit, nature's offerings were deposited in these jars in the
sitting room during the day. I don’t think this was nearly as bad 
as having to sit still and not talk the whole day. You can’t
imagine what a trial that was for “Miss Quack-Quack.” I have to 
whisper on ordinary days; but not being able to speak or move 
was ten times worse. After being flattened by three days of 
continuous sitting, my bottom was very stiff and painful. Some 
exercises at bedtime helped. 

Yours, Anne 

Thursday , 1 October , 1942 

Dear Kitty, 

I got a terrible shock yesterday. Suddenly at eight o clock 
the bell rang loudly. Of course, I thought that someone had 
come: you 11 guess who I mean. But I calmed down a bit when 
everyone said it must be some urchins or perhaps the postman. 

The days are becoming very quiet here. Lewin, a small 
Jewish chemist and dispenser, works for Mr. Kraler in the 
kitchen. He knows the whole building well and therefore we 
are always afraid that he'll take it into his head to have a peep 
in the old laboratory. We are as quiet as mice. Who, three 
months ago, would ever have guessed that quicksilver Anne 
would have to sit still for hours-and, what's more, could? 

The twenty-ninth was Mrs. Van Daan's birthday. Although 
it could not be celebrated in a big way, we managed a little 
party in her honor, with a specially nice meal, and she
received some small presents and flowers. Red carnations from 
her husband; that seems to be a family tradition. To pause for 
a moment on the subject of Mrs. Van Daan, I must tell you 
that her attempts to flirt with Daddy are a source of continual 
irritation for me. She strokes his face and hair, pulls her skirt 
right up, and makes so-called witty remarks, trying in this way 
to attract Pirn's attention. Pirn, thank goodness, doesn’t find 
her either attractive or funny, so he doesn't play ball. Mummy 
doesn’t behave like that with Mr. Van Daan, I’ve said that to 
Mrs. Van Daan’s face. 

Now and then Peter comes out of his shell and can be quite 
funny. We have one thing in common, from which everyone 
usually gets a lot of amusement: we both love dressing up. He 
appeared in one of Mrs. Van Daan’s very narrow dresses and I 
put on his suit. He wore a hat and I a cap. The grownups were 
doubled up with laughter and we enjoyed ourselves as much 
as they did. Elli has bought new skirts for Margot and me at 
Bijenkorf's. The material is rotten, just like sacking, and they 
cost 24.00 florins and 7,50 florins respectively. What a
difference compared with before the war! 

Another nice thing I've been keeping up my sleeve. Elli has 
written to some secretarial school or other and ordered a 
correspondence course in shorthand for Margot, Peter, and me. 
You wait and see what perfect experts we shall be by next 
year. In any case its extremely important to be able to write 
in a code. 

Yours, Anne 

Saturday , 3 October , 1942 

Dear Kitty, 

There was another dust-up yesterday. Mummy kicked up a 
frightful row and told Daddy just what she thought of me. 
Then she had an awful fit of tears so, of course, off I went too; 
and Td got such an awful headache anyway. Finally I told 
Daddy that I’m much more fond of him than Mummy, to 
which he replied that I’d get over that But I don’t believe it. 
I have to simply force myself to stay calm with her. Daddy 
wishes that I would sometimes volunteer to help Mummy, 
when she doesn’t feel well or has a headache; but I shan’t. I 
am working hard at my French and am now reading La Belle 
Nivermise. 

Yours, Anne 

Friday , 9 October , 1942 

Dear Kitty, 

I’ve only got dismal and depressing news for you today. 
Our many Jewish friends are being taken away by the dozen. 
These people are treated by the Gestapo without a shred 
of decency, being loaded into cattle trucks and sent to 
Westerbork, the big Jewish camp in Drente. Westerbork 
sounds terrible: only one washing cubicle for a hundred 
people and not nearly enough lavatories There is no separate 
accommodation. Men, women, and children all sleep 
together. One hears of frightful immorality because of this; 
and a lot of the women, and even girls, who stay there any 
length of time are expecting babies. 

It is impossible to escape; most of the people in the camp 
are branded as inmates by their shaven heads and many also 
by their Jewish appearance. 

If it is as bad as this in Holland whatever will it be like 
in the distant and barbarous regions they are sent to? We 
assume that most of them are murdered. The English radio 
speaks of their being gassed. 

Perhaps that is the quickest way to die. I feel terribly 
upset. I couldn't tear myself away while Miep told these 
dreadful stories; and she herself was equally wound up for 
that matter. Just recently for instance, a poor old crippled 
Jewess was sitting on her doorstep; she had been told to wait 
there by the Gestapo, who had gone to fetch a car to take 
her away. The poor old thing was terrified by the guns that 
were shooting at English planes overhead, and by the glaring 
beams of the searchlights. But Miep did not dare take her 
in; no one would undergo such a risk. The Germans strike 
without the slightest mercy. Elli too is very quiet: her boy 
friend has got to go to Germany. She is afraid that the
air-men who fly over our homes will drop their bombs, often 
weighing a million kilos, on Dirk's head. Jokes such as “he's 
not likely to get a million" and “it only takes one bomb" are 
in rather bad taste. Dirk is certainly not the only one who 
has to go: trainloads of boys leave daily. If they stop at a 
small station en route, sometimes some of them manage to 
get out unnoticed and escape; perhaps a few manage it. This, 
however, is not the end of my bad news. Have you ever heard 
of hostages? That's the latest thing in penalties for sabotage. 
Can you imagine anything so dreadful? 

Prominent citizens— innocent people— are thrown into 
prison to await their fate. If the saboteur can't be traced, the 
Gestapo simply put about five hostages against the wall. 
Announcements of their deaths appear in the papers frequently. These outrages are described as “fatal accidents." 
Nice people, the Germans! To think that I was once one 
of them too! No, Hitler took away our nationality long ago. 

In fact, Germans and Jews are the greatest enemies in the 
world. 

Yours, Anne 

Friday , 16 October , 1942 

Dear Kitty, 

Im terribly busy. I’ve just translated a chapter out of La 
Belle Nivermise and made notes of new words. Then a
perfectly foul math problem and three pages of French grammar. 
I flatly refuse to do these math problems every day. Daddy 
agrees that they’re vile. I’m almost better at them than he is, 
though neither of us are much good and we often have to 
fetch Margot. I’m the furthest on of the three of us in 
shorthand. 

Yesterday I finished The Assault. It’s quite amusing, but 
doesn’t touch Joop ter Heul. As a matter of fact, I think 
Cissy van Marxveldt is a first-rate writer. I shall definitely let 
my children read her books. Mummy, Margot, and I are as 
thick as thieves again. It’s really much better. Margot and I 
got in the same bed together last evening; it was a frightful 
squash, but that was just the fun of it. She asked if she could 
read my diary. I said “Yes-at least, bits of it”; and then I 
asked if I could read hers and she said “Yes.” Then we got on 
to the subject of the future. I asked her what she wanted to 
be. But she wouldn’t say and made a great secret of it. I 
gathered something about teaching; I’m not sure if I’m right, 
but I think so. Really, I shouldn’t be so curious! 

This morning I was lying on Peter’s bed, having chased 
him off at first. He was furious with me, not that I cared 
very much. He might be a bit more friendly with me for 
once; after all I did give him an apple yesterday. 

I asked Margot if she thought I was very ugly. She said 
that I was quite attractive and that I had nice eyes. Rather 
vague, don’t you think? 

Till next time, 

Yours, Anne