Chapter XIV.

The Atlanta Exposition Address


The Atlanta Exposition, at which I had been asked to make an address as
a representative of the Negro race, as stated in the last chapter, was
opened with a short address from Governor Bullock. After other
interesting exercises, including an invocation from Bishop Nelson, of
Georgia, a dedicatory ode by Albert Howell, Jr., and addresses by the
President of the Exposition and Mrs. Joseph Thompson, the President of
the Woman’s Board, Governor Bullock introduce me with the words, “We
have with us to-day a representative of Negro enterprise and Negro
civilization.”

When I arose to speak, there was considerable cheering, especially from
the coloured people. As I remember it now, the thing that was uppermost
in my mind was the desire to say something that would cement the
friendship of the races and bring about hearty cooperation between
them. So far as my outward surroundings were concerned, the only thing
that I recall distinctly now is that when I got up, I saw thousands of
eyes looking intently into my face. The following is the address which
I delivered:—

Mr. President and Gentlemen of the Board of Directors and Citizens.

One-third of the population of the South is of the Negro race. No
enterprise seeking the material, civil, or moral welfare of this
section can disregard this element of our population and reach the
highest success. I but convey to you, Mr. President and Directors, the
sentiment of the masses of my race when I say that in no way have the
value and manhood of the American Negro been more fittingly and
generously recognized than by the managers of this magnificent
Exposition at every stage of its progress. It is a recognition that
will do more to cement the friendship of the two races than any
occurrence since the dawn of our freedom.

Not only this, but the opportunity here afforded will awaken among us a
new era of industrial progress. Ignorant and inexperienced, it is not
strange that in the first years of our new life we began at the top
instead of at the bottom; that a seat in Congress or the state
legislature was more sought than real estate or industrial skill; that
the political convention or stump speaking had more attractions than
starting a dairy farm or truck garden.

A ship lost at sea for many days suddenly sighted a friendly vessel.
From the mast of the unfortunate vessel was seen a signal, “Water,
water; we die of thirst!” The answer from the friendly vessel at once
came back, “Cast down your bucket where you are.” A second time the
signal, “Water, water; send us water!” ran up from the distressed
vessel, and was answered, “Cast down your bucket where you are.” And a
third and fourth signal for water was answered, “Cast down your bucket
where you are.” The captain of the distressed vessel, at last heeding
the injunction, cast down his bucket, and it came up full of fresh,
sparkling water from the mouth of the Amazon River. To those of my race
who depend on bettering their condition in a foreign land or who
underestimate the importance of cultivating friendly relations with the
Southern white man, who is their next-door neighbour, I would say:
“Cast down your bucket where you are”—cast it down in making friends in
every manly way of the people of all races by whom we are surrounded.

Cast it down in agriculture, mechanics, in commerce, in domestic
service, and in the professions. And in this connection it is well to
bear in mind that whatever other sins the South may be called to bear,
when it comes to business, pure and simple, it is in the South that the
Negro is given a man’s chance in the commercial world, and in nothing
is this Exposition more eloquent than in emphasizing this chance. Our
greatest danger is that in the great leap from slavery to freedom we
may overlook the fact that the masses of us are to live by the
productions of our hands, and fail to keep in mind that we shall
prosper in proportion as we learn to dignify and glorify common labour
and put brains and skill into the common occupations of life; shall
prosper in proportion as we learn to draw the line between the
superficial and the substantial, the ornamental gewgaws of life and the
useful. No race can prosper till it learns that there is as much
dignity in tilling a field as in writing a poem. It is at the bottom of
life we must begin, and not at the top. Nor should we permit our
grievances to overshadow our opportunities.

To those of the white race who look to the incoming of those of foreign
birth and strange tongue and habits of the prosperity of the South,
were I permitted I would repeat what I say to my own race: “Cast down
your bucket where you are.” Cast it down among the eight millions of
Negroes whose habits you know, whose fidelity and love you have tested
in days when to have proved treacherous meant the ruin of your
firesides. Cast down your bucket among these people who have, without
strikes and labour wars, tilled your fields, cleared your forests,
builded your railroads and cities, and brought forth treasures from the
bowels of the earth, and helped make possible this magnificent
representation of the progress of the South. Casting down your bucket
among my people, helping and encouraging them as you are doing on these
grounds, and to education of head, hand, and heart, you will find that
they will buy your surplus land, make blossom the waste places in your
fields, and run your factories. While doing this, you can be sure in
the future, as in the past, that you and your families will be
surrounded by the most patient, faithful, law-abiding, and unresentful
people that the world has seen. As we have proved our loyalty to you in
the past, nursing your children, watching by the sick-bed of your
mothers and fathers, and often following them with tear-dimmed eyes to
their graves, so in the future, in our humble way, we shall stand by
you with a devotion that no foreigner can approach, ready to lay down
our lives, if need be, in defence of yours, interlacing our industrial,
commercial, civil, and religious life with yours in a way that shall
make the interests of both races one. In all things that are purely
social we can be as separate as the fingers, yet one as the hand in all
things essential to mutual progress.

There is no defence or security for any of us except in the highest
intelligence and development of all. If anywhere there are efforts
tending to curtail the fullest growth of the Negro, let these efforts
be turned into stimulating, encouraging, and making him the most useful
and intelligent citizen. Effort or means so invested will pay a
thousand per cent interest. These efforts will be twice
blessed—“blessing him that gives and him that takes.”

There is no escape through law of man or God from the inevitable:—

    The laws of changeless justice bind
        Oppressor with oppressed;
    And close as sin and suffering joined
        We march to fate abreast.

Nearly sixteen millions of hands will aid you in pulling the load
upward, or they will pull against you the load downward. We shall
constitute one-third and more of the ignorance and crime of the South,
or one-third its intelligence and progress; we shall contribute
one-third to the business and industrial prosperity of the South, or we
shall prove a veritable body of death, stagnating, depressing,
retarding every effort to advance the body politic.

Gentlemen of the Exposition, as we present to you our humble effort at
an exhibition of our progress, you must not expect overmuch. Starting
thirty years ago with ownership here and there in a few quilts and
pumpkins and chickens (gathered from miscellaneous sources), remember
the path that has led from these to the inventions and production of
agricultural implements, buggies, steam-engines, newspapers, books,
statuary, carving, paintings, the management of drug-stores and banks,
has not been trodden without contact with thorns and thistles. While we
take pride in what we exhibit as a result of our independent efforts,
we do not for a moment forget that our part in this exhibition would
fall far short of your expectations but for the constant help that has
come to our education life, not only from the Southern states, but
especially from Northern philanthropists, who have made their gifts a
constant stream of blessing and encouragement.

The wisest among my race understand that the agitation of questions of
social equality is the extremest folly, and that progress in the
enjoyment of all the privileges that will come to us must be the result
of severe and constant struggle rather than of artificial forcing. No
race that has anything to contribute to the markets of the world is
long in any degree ostracized. It is important and right that all
privileges of the law be ours, but it is vastly more important that we
be prepared for the exercises of these privileges. The opportunity to
earn a dollar in a factory just now is worth infinitely more than the
opportunity to spend a dollar in an opera-house.

In conclusion, may I repeat that nothing in thirty years has given us
more hope and encouragement, and drawn us so near to you of the white
race, as this opportunity offered by the Exposition; and here bending,
as it were, over the altar that represents the results of the struggles
of your race and mine, both starting practically empty-handed three
decades ago, I pledge that in your effort to work out the great and
intricate problem which God has laid at the doors of the South, you
shall have at all times the patient, sympathetic help of my race; only
let this be constantly in mind, that, while from representations in
these buildings of the product of field, of forest, of mine, of
factory, letters, and art, much good will come, yet far above and
beyond material benefits will be that higher good, that, let us pray
God, will come, in a blotting out of sectional differences and racial
animosities and suspicions, in a determination to administer absolute
justice, in a willing obedience among all classes to the mandates of
law. This, this, coupled with our material prosperity, will bring into
our beloved South a new heaven and a new earth.

The first thing that I remember, after I had finished speaking, was
that Governor Bullock rushed across the platform and took me by the
hand, and that others did the same. I received so many and such hearty
congratulations that I found it difficult to get out of the building. I
did not appreciate to any degree, however, the impression which my
address seemed to have made, until the next morning, when I went into
the business part of the city. As soon as I was recognized, I was
surprised to find myself pointed out and surrounded by a crowd of men
who wished to shake hands with me. This was kept up on every street on
to which I went, to an extent which embarrassed me so much that I went
back to my boarding-place. The next morning I returned to Tuskegee. At
the station in Atlanta, and at almost all of the stations at which the
train stopped between that city and Tuskegee, I found a crowd of people
anxious to shake hands with me.

The papers in all parts of the United States published the address in
full, and for months afterward there were complimentary editorial
references to it. Mr. Clark Howell, the editor of the Atlanta
Constitution, telegraphed to a New York paper, among other words, the
following, “I do not exaggerate when I say that Professor Booker T.
Washington’s address yesterday was one of the most notable speeches,
both as to character and as to the warmth of its reception, ever
delivered to a Southern audience. The address was a revelation. The
whole speech is a platform upon which blacks and whites can stand with
full justice to each other.”

The Boston Transcript said editorially: “The speech of Booker T.
Washington at the Atlanta Exposition, this week, seems to have dwarfed
all the other proceedings and the Exposition itself. The sensation that
it has caused in the press has never been equalled.”

I very soon began receiving all kinds of propositions from lecture
bureaus, and editors of magazines and papers, to take the lecture
platform, and to write articles. One lecture bureau offered me fifty
thousand dollars, or two hundred dollars a night and expenses, if I
would place my services at its disposal for a given period. To all
these communications I replied that my life-work was at Tuskegee; and
that whenever I spoke it must be in the interests of Tuskegee school
and my race, and that I would enter into no arrangements that seemed to
place a mere commercial value upon my services.

Some days after its delivery I sent a copy of my address to the
President of the United States, the Hon. Grover Cleveland. I received
from him the following autograph reply:—

Gray Gables, Buzzard’s Bay, Mass.,

October 6, 1895.

Booker T. Washington, Esq.:

My Dear Sir: I thank you for sending me a copy of your address
delivered at the Atlanta Exposition.

I thank you with much enthusiasm for making the address. I have read it
with intense interest, and I think the Exposition would be fully
justified if it did not do more than furnish the opportunity for its
delivery. Your words cannot fail to delight and encourage all who wish
well for your race; and if our coloured fellow-citizens do not from
your utterances gather new hope and form new determinations to gain
every valuable advantage offered them by their citizenship, it will be
strange indeed.

Yours very truly,

Grover Cleveland.

Later I met Mr. Cleveland, for the first time, when, as President, he
visited the Atlanta Exposition. At the request of myself and others he
consented to spend an hour in the Negro Building, for the purpose of
inspecting the Negro exhibit and of giving the coloured people in
attendance an opportunity to shake hands with him. As soon as I met Mr.
Cleveland I became impressed with his simplicity, greatness, and rugged
honesty. I have met him many times since then, both at public functions
and at his private residence in Princeton, and the more I see of him
the more I admire him. When he visited the Negro Building in Atlanta he
seemed to give himself up wholly, for that hour, to the coloured
people. He seemed to be as careful to shake hands with some old
coloured “auntie” clad partially in rags, and to take as much pleasure
in doing so, as if he were greeting some millionaire. Many of the
coloured people took advantage of the occasion to get him to write his
name in a book or on a slip of paper. He was as careful and patient in
doing this as if he were putting his signature to some great state
document.

Mr. Cleveland has not only shown his friendship for me in many personal
ways, but has always consented to do anything I have asked of him for
our school. This he has done, whether it was to make a personal
donation or to use his influence in securing the donations of others.
Judging from my personal acquaintance with Mr. Cleveland, I do not
believe that he is conscious of possessing any colour prejudice. He is
too great for that. In my contact with people I find that, as a rule,
it is only the little, narrow people who live for themselves, who never
read good books, who do not travel, who never open up their souls in a
way to permit them to come into contact with other souls—with the great
outside world. No man whose vision is bounded by colour can come into
contact with what is highest and best in the world. In meeting men, in
many places, I have found that the happiest people are those who do the
most for others; the most miserable are those who do the least. I have
also found that few things, if any, are capable of making one so blind
and narrow as race prejudice. I often say to our students, in the
course of my talks to them on Sunday evenings in the chapel, that the
longer I live and the more experience I have of the world, the more I
am convinced that, after all, the one thing that is most worth living
for—and dying for, if need be—is the opportunity of making some one
else more happy and more useful.

The coloured people and the coloured newspapers at first seemed to be
greatly pleased with the character of my Atlanta address, as well as
with its reception. But after the first burst of enthusiasm began to
die away, and the coloured people began reading the speech in cold
type, some of them seemed to feel that they had been hypnotized. They
seemed to feel that I had been too liberal in my remarks toward the
Southern whites, and that I had not spoken out strongly enough for what
they termed the “rights” of my race. For a while there was a reaction,
so far as a certain element of my own race was concerned, but later
these reactionary ones seemed to have been won over to my way of
believing and acting.

While speaking of changes in public sentiment, I recall that about ten
years after the school at Tuskegee was established, I had an experience
that I shall never forget. Dr. Lyman Abbott, then the pastor of
Plymouth Church, and also editor of the Outlook (then the Christian
Union), asked me to write a letter for his paper giving my opinion of
the exact condition, mental and moral, of the coloured ministers in the
South, as based upon my observations. I wrote the letter, giving the
exact facts as I conceived them to be. The picture painted was a rather
black one—or, since I am black, shall I say “white”? It could not be
otherwise with a race but a few years out of slavery, a race which had
not had time or opportunity to produce a competent ministry.

What I said soon reached every Negro minister in the country, I think,
and the letters of condemnation which I received from them were not
few. I think that for a year after the publication of this article
every association and every conference or religious body of any kind,
of my race, that met, did not fail before adjourning to pass a
resolution condemning me, or calling upon me to retract or modify what
I had said. Many of these organizations went so far in their
resolutions as to advise parents to cease sending their children to
Tuskegee. One association even appointed a “missionary” whose duty it
was to warn the people against sending their children to Tuskegee. This
missionary had a son in the school, and I noticed that, whatever the
“missionary” might have said or done with regard to others, he was
careful not to take his son away from the institution. Many of the
coloured papers, especially those that were the organs of religious
bodies, joined in the general chorus of condemnation or demands for
retraction.

During the whole time of the excitement, and through all the criticism,
I did not utter a word of explanation or retraction. I knew that I was
right, and that time and the sober second thought of the people would
vindicate me. It was not long before the bishops and other church
leaders began to make careful investigation of the conditions of the
ministry, and they found out that I was right. In fact, the oldest and
most influential bishop in one branch of the Methodist Church said that
my words were far too mild. Very soon public sentiment began making
itself felt, in demanding a purifying of the ministry. While this is
not yet complete by any means, I think I may say, without egotism, and
I have been told by many of our most influential ministers, that my
words had much to do with starting a demand for the placing of a higher
type of men in the pulpit. I have had the satisfaction of having many
who once condemned me thank me heartily for my frank words.

The change of the attitude of the Negro ministry, so far as regards
myself, is so complete that at the present time I have no warmer
friends among any class than I have among the clergymen. The
improvement in the character and life of the Negro ministers is one of
the most gratifying evidences of the progress of the race. My
experience with them, as well as other events in my life, convince me
that the thing to do, when one feels sure that he has said or done the
right thing, and is condemned, is to stand still and keep quiet. If he
is right, time will show it.

In the midst of the discussion which was going on concerning my Atlanta
speech, I received the letter which I give below, from Dr. Gilman, the
President of Johns Hopkins University, who had been made chairman of
the judges of award in connection with the Atlanta Exposition:—

Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore,

President’s Office, September 30, 1895.

Dear Mr. Washington: Would it be agreeable to you to be one of the
Judges of Award in the Department of Education at Atlanta? If so, I
shall be glad to place your name upon the list. A line by telegraph
will be welcomed.

Yours very truly,

D.C. Gilman

I think I was even more surprised to receive this invitation than I had
been to receive the invitation to speak at the opening of the
Exposition. It was to be a part of my duty, as one of the jurors, to
pass not only upon the exhibits of the coloured schools, but also upon
those of the white schools. I accepted the position, and spent a month
in Atlanta in performance of the duties which it entailed. The board of
jurors was a large one, containing in all of sixty members. It was
about equally divided between Southern white people and Northern white
people. Among them were college presidents, leading scientists and men
of letters, and specialists in many subjects. When the group of jurors
to which I was assigned met for organization, Mr. Thomas Nelson Page,
who was one of the number, moved that I be made secretary of that
division, and the motion was unanimously adopted. Nearly half of our
division were Southern people. In performing my duties in the
inspection of the exhibits of white schools I was in every case treated
with respect, and at the close of our labours I parted from my
associates with regret.

I am often asked to express myself more freely than I do upon the
political condition and the political future of my race. These
recollections of my experience in Atlanta give me the opportunity to do
so briefly. My own belief is, although I have never before said so in
so many words, that the time will come when the Negro in the South will
be accorded all the political rights which his ability, character, and
material possessions entitle him to. I think, though, that the
opportunity to freely exercise such political rights will not come in
any large degree through outside or artificial forcing, but will be
accorded to the Negro by the Southern white people themselves, and that
they will protect him in the exercise of those rights. Just as soon as
the South gets over the old feeling that it is being forced by
“foreigners,” or “aliens,” to do something which it does not want to
do, I believe that the change in the direction that I have indicated is
going to begin. In fact, there are indications that it is already
beginning in a slight degree.

Let me illustrate my meaning. Suppose that some months before the
opening of the Atlanta Exposition there had been a general demand from
the press and public platform outside the South that a Negro be given a
place on the opening programme, and that a Negro be placed upon the
board of jurors of award. Would any such recognition of the race have
taken place? I do not think so. The Atlanta officials went as far as
they did because they felt it to be a pleasure, as well as a duty, to
reward what they considered merit in the Negro race. Say what we will,
there is something in human nature which we cannot blot out, which
makes one man, in the end, recognize and reward merit in another,
regardless of colour or race.

I believe it is the duty of the Negro—as the greater part of the race
is already doing—to deport himself modestly in regard to political
claims, depending upon the slow but sure influences that proceed from
the possession of property, intelligence, and high character for the
full recognition of his political rights. I think that the according of
the full exercise of political rights is going to be a matter of
natural, slow growth, not an over-night, gourd-vine affair. I do not
believe that the Negro should cease voting, for a man cannot learn the
exercise of self-government by ceasing to vote, any more than a boy can
learn to swim by keeping out of the water, but I do believe that in his
voting he should more and more be influenced by those of intelligence
and character who are his next-door neighbours.

I know coloured men who, through the encouragement, help, and advice of
Southern white people, have accumulated thousands of dollars’ worth of
property, but who, at the same time, would never think of going to
those same persons for advice concerning the casting of their ballots.
This, it seems to me, is unwise and unreasonable, and should cease. In
saying this I do not mean that the Negro should truckle, or not vote
from principle, for the instant he ceases to vote from principle he
loses the confidence and respect of the Southern white man even.

I do not believe that any state should make a law that permits an
ignorant and poverty-stricken white man to vote, and prevents a black
man in the same condition from voting. Such a law is not only unjust,
but it will react, as all unjust laws do, in time; for the effect of
such a law is to encourage the Negro to secure education and property,
and at the same time it encourages the white man to remain in ignorance
and poverty. I believe that in time, through the operation of
intelligence and friendly race relations, all cheating at the
ballot-box in the South will cease. It will become apparent that the
white man who begins by cheating a Negro out of his ballot soon learns
to cheat a white man out of his, and that the man who does this ends
his career of dishonesty by the theft of property or by some equally
serious crime. In my opinion, the time will come when the South will
encourage all of its citizens to vote. It will see that it pays better,
from every standpoint, to have healthy, vigorous life than to have that
political stagnation which always results when one-half of the
population has no share and no interest in the Government.

As a rule, I believe in universal, free suffrage, but I believe that in
the South we are confronted with peculiar conditions that justify the
protection of the ballot in many of the states, for a while at least,
either by an education test, a property test, or by both combined; but
whatever tests are required, they should be made to apply with equal
and exact justice to both races.