Chapter II.

Boyhood Days


After the coming of freedom there were two points upon which
practically all the people on our place were agreed, and I found that
this was generally true throughout the South: that they must change
their names, and that they must leave the old plantation for at least a
few days or weeks in order that they might really feel sure that they
were free.

In some way a feeling got among the coloured people that it was far
from proper for them to bear the surname of their former owners, and a
great many of them took other surnames. This was one of the first signs
of freedom. When they were slaves, a coloured person was simply called
“John” or “Susan.” There was seldom occasion for more than the use of
the one name. If “John” or “Susan” belonged to a white man by the name
of “Hatcher,” sometimes he was called “John Hatcher,” or as often
“Hatcher’s John.” But there was a feeling that “John Hatcher” or
“Hatcher’s John” was not the proper title by which to denote a freeman;
and so in many cases “John Hatcher” was changed to “John S. Lincoln” or
“John S. Sherman,” the initial “S” standing for no name, it being
simply a part of what the coloured man proudly called his “entitles.”

As I have stated, most of the coloured people left the old plantation
for a short while at least, so as to be sure, it seemed, that they
could leave and try their freedom on to see how it felt. After they had
remained away for a while, many of the older slaves, especially,
returned to their old homes and made some kind of contract with their
former owners by which they remained on the estate.

My mother’s husband, who was the stepfather of my brother John and
myself, did not belong to the same owners as did my mother. In fact, he
seldom came to our plantation. I remember seeing him there perhaps once
a year, that being about Christmas time. In some way, during the war,
by running away and following the Federal soldiers, it seems, he found
his way into the new state of West Virginia. As soon as freedom was
declared, he sent for my mother to come to the Kanawha Valley, in West
Virginia. At that time a journey from Virginia over the mountains to
West Virginia was rather a tedious and in some cases a painful
undertaking. What little clothing and few household goods we had were
placed in a cart, but the children walked the greater portion of the
distance, which was several hundred miles.

I do not think any of us ever had been very far from the plantation,
and the taking of a long journey into another state was quite an event.
The parting from our former owners and the members of our own race on
the plantation was a serious occasion. From the time of our parting
till their death we kept up a correspondence with the older members of
the family, and in later years we have kept in touch with those who
were the younger members. We were several weeks making the trip, and
most of the time we slept in the open air and did our cooking over a
log fire out-of-doors. One night I recall that we camped near an
abandoned log cabin, and my mother decided to build a fire in that for
cooking, and afterward to make a “pallet” on the floor for our
sleeping. Just as the fire had gotten well started a large black snake
fully a yard and a half long dropped down the chimney and ran out on
the floor. Of course we at once abandoned that cabin. Finally we
reached our destination—a little town called Malden, which is about
five miles from Charleston, the present capital of the state.

At that time salt-mining was the great industry in that part of West
Virginia, and the little town of Malden was right in the midst of the
salt-furnaces. My stepfather had already secured a job at a
salt-furnace, and he had also secured a little cabin for us to live in.
Our new house was no better than the one we had left on the old
plantation in Virginia. In fact, in one respect it was worse.
Notwithstanding the poor condition of our plantation cabin, we were at
all times sure of pure air. Our new home was in the midst of a cluster
of cabins crowded closely together, and as there were no sanitary
regulations, the filth about the cabins was often intolerable. Some of
our neighbours were coloured people, and some were the poorest and most
ignorant and degraded white people. It was a motley mixture. Drinking,
gambling, quarrels, fights, and shockingly immoral practices were
frequent. All who lived in the little town were in one way or another
connected with the salt business. Though I was a mere child, my
stepfather put me and my brother at work in one of the furnaces. Often
I began work as early as four o’clock in the morning.

The first thing I ever learned in the way of book knowledge was while
working in this salt-furnace. Each salt-packer had his barrels marked
with a certain number. The number allotted to my stepfather was “18.”
At the close of the day’s work the boss of the packers would come
around and put “18” on each of our barrels, and I soon learned to
recognize that figure wherever I saw it, and after a while got to the
point where I could make that figure, though I knew nothing about any
other figures or letters.

From the time that I can remember having any thoughts about anything, I
recall that I had an intense longing to learn to read. I determined,
when quite a small child, that, if I accomplished nothing else in life,
I would in some way get enough education to enable me to read common
books and newspapers. Soon after we got settled in some manner in our
new cabin in West Virginia, I induced my mother to get hold of a book
for me. How or where she got it I do not know, but in some way she
procured an old copy of Webster’s “blue-back” spelling-book, which
contained the alphabet, followed by such meaningless words as “ab,”
“ba,” “ca,” “da.” I began at once to devour this book, and I think that
it was the first one I ever had in my hands. I had learned from
somebody that the way to begin to read was to learn the alphabet, so I
tried in all the ways I could think of to learn it,—all of course
without a teacher, for I could find no one to teach me. At that time
there was not a single member of my race anywhere near us who could
read, and I was too timid to approach any of the white people. In some
way, within a few weeks, I mastered the greater portion of the
alphabet. In all my efforts to learn to read my mother shared fully my
ambition, and sympathized with me and aided me in every way that she
could. Though she was totally ignorant, she had high ambitions for her
children, and a large fund of good, hard, common sense, which seemed to
enable her to meet and master every situation. If I have done anything
in life worth attention, I feel sure that I inherited the disposition
from my mother.

In the midst of my struggles and longing for an education, a young
coloured boy who had learned to read in the state of Ohio came to
Malden. As soon as the coloured people found out that he could read, a
newspaper was secured, and at the close of nearly every day’s work this
young man would be surrounded by a group of men and women who were
anxious to hear him read the news contained in the papers. How I used
to envy this man! He seemed to me to be the one young man in all the
world who ought to be satisfied with his attainments.

About this time the question of having some kind of a school opened for
the coloured children in the village began to be discussed by members
of the race. As it would be the first school for Negro children that
had ever been opened in that part of Virginia, it was, of course, to be
a great event, and the discussion excited the wildest interest. The
most perplexing question was where to find a teacher. The young man
from Ohio who had learned to read the papers was considered, but his
age was against him. In the midst of the discussion about a teacher,
another young coloured man from Ohio, who had been a soldier, in some
way found his way into town. It was soon learned that he possessed
considerable education, and he was engaged by the coloured people to
teach their first school. As yet no free schools had been started for
coloured people in that section, hence each family agreed to pay a
certain amount per month, with the understanding that the teacher was
to “board ’round”—that is, spend a day with each family. This was not
bad for the teacher, for each family tried to provide the very best on
the day the teacher was to be its guest. I recall that I looked forward
with an anxious appetite to the “teacher’s day” at our little cabin.

This experience of a whole race beginning to go to school for the first
time, presents one of the most interesting studies that has ever
occurred in connection with the development of any race. Few people who
were not right in the midst of the scenes can form any exact idea of
the intense desire which the people of my race showed for an education.
As I have stated, it was a whole race trying to go to school. Few were
too young, and none too old, to make the attempt to learn. As fast as
any kind of teachers could be secured, not only were day-schools
filled, but night-schools as well. The great ambition of the older
people was to try to learn to read the Bible before they died. With
this end in view men and women who were fifty or seventy-five years old
would often be found in the night-school. Some day-schools were formed
soon after freedom, but the principal book studied in the Sunday-school
was the spelling-book. Day-school, night-school, Sunday-school, were
always crowded, and often many had to be turned away for want of room.

The opening of the school in the Kanawha Valley, however, brought to me
one of the keenest disappointments that I ever experienced. I had been
working in a salt-furnace for several months, and my stepfather had
discovered that I had a financial value, and so, when the school
opened, he decided that he could not spare me from my work. This
decision seemed to cloud my every ambition. The disappointment was made
all the more severe by reason of the fact that my place of work was
where I could see the happy children passing to and from school
mornings and afternoons. Despite this disappointment, however, I
determined that I would learn something, anyway. I applied myself with
greater earnestness than ever to the mastering of what was in the
“blue-back” speller.

My mother sympathized with me in my disappointment, and sought to
comfort me in all the ways she could, and to help me find a way to
learn. After a while I succeeded in making arrangements with the
teacher to give me some lessons at night, after the day’s work was
done. These night lessons were so welcome that I think I learned more
at night than the other children did during the day. My own experiences
in the night-school gave me faith in the night-school idea, with which,
in after years, I had to do both at Hampton and Tuskegee. But my boyish
heart was still set upon going to the day-school, and I let no
opportunity slip to push my case. Finally I won, and was permitted to
go to the school in the day for a few months, with the understanding
that I was to rise early in the morning and work in the furnace till
nine o’clock, and return immediately after school closed in the
afternoon for at least two more hours of work.

The schoolhouse was some distance from the furnace, and as I had to
work till nine o’clock, and the school opened at nine, I found myself
in a difficulty. School would always be begun before I reached it, and
sometimes my class had recited. To get around this difficulty I yielded
to a temptation for which most people, I suppose, will condemn me; but
since it is a fact, I might as well state it. I have great faith in the
power and influence of facts. It is seldom that anything is permanently
gained by holding back a fact. There was a large clock in a little
office in the furnace. This clock, of course, all the hundred or more
workmen depended upon to regulate their hours of beginning and ending
the day’s work. I got the idea that the way for me to reach school on
time was to move the clock hands from half-past eight up to the nine
o’clock mark. This I found myself doing morning after morning, till the
furnace “boss” discovered that something was wrong, and locked the
clock in a case. I did not mean to inconvenience anybody. I simply
meant to reach that schoolhouse in time.

When, however, I found myself at the school for the first time, I also
found myself confronted with two other difficulties. In the first
place, I found that all the other children wore hats or caps on their
heads, and I had neither hat nor cap. In fact, I do not remember that
up to the time of going to school I had ever worn any kind of covering
upon my head, nor do I recall that either I or anybody else had even
thought anything about the need of covering for my head. But, of
course, when I saw how all the other boys were dressed, I began to feel
quite uncomfortable. As usual, I put the case before my mother, and she
explained to me that she had no money with which to buy a “store hat,”
which was a rather new institution at that time among the members of my
race and was considered quite the thing for young and old to own, but
that she would find a way to help me out of the difficulty. She
accordingly got two pieces of “homespun” (jeans) and sewed them
together, and I was soon the proud possessor of my first cap.

The lesson that my mother taught me in this has always remained with
me, and I have tried as best as I could to teach it to others. I have
always felt proud, whenever I think of the incident, that my mother had
strength of character enough not to be led into the temptation of
seeming to be that which she was not—of trying to impress my
schoolmates and others with the fact that she was able to buy me a
“store hat” when she was not. I have always felt proud that she refused
to go into debt for that which she did not have the money to pay for.
Since that time I have owned many kinds of caps and hats, but never one
of which I have felt so proud as of the cap made of the two pieces of
cloth sewed together by my mother. I have noted the fact, but without
satisfaction, I need not add, that several of the boys who began their
careers with “store hats” and who were my schoolmates and used to join
in the sport that was made of me because I had only a “homespun” cap,
have ended their careers in the penitentiary, while others are not able
now to buy any kind of hat.

My second difficulty was with regard to my name, or rather _A_ name.
From the time when I could remember anything, I had been called simply
“Booker.” Before going to school it had never occurred to me that it
was needful or appropriate to have an additional name. When I heard the
school-roll called, I noticed that all of the children had at least two
names, and some of them indulged in what seemed to me the extravagance
of having three. I was in deep perplexity, because I knew that the
teacher would demand of me at least two names, and I had only one. By
the time the occasion came for the enrolling of my name, an idea
occurred to me which I thought would make me equal to the situation;
and so, when the teacher asked me what my full name was, I calmly told
him “Booker Washington,” as if I had been called by that name all my
life; and by that name I have since been known. Later in my life I
found that my mother had given me the name of “Booker Taliaferro” soon
after I was born, but in some way that part of my name seemed to
disappear and for a long while was forgotten, but as soon as I found
out about it I revived it, and made my full name “Booker Taliaferro
Washington.” I think there are not many men in our country who have had
the privilege of naming themselves in the way that I have.

More than once I have tried to picture myself in the position of a boy
or man with an honoured and distinguished ancestry which I could trace
back through a period of hundreds of years, and who had not only
inherited a name, but fortune and a proud family homestead; and yet I
have sometimes had the feeling that if I had inherited these, and had
been a member of a more popular race, I should have been inclined to
yield to the temptation of depending upon my ancestry and my colour to
do that for me which I should do for myself. Years ago I resolved that
because I had no ancestry myself I would leave a record of which my
children would be proud, and which might encourage them to still higher
effort.

The world should not pass judgment upon the Negro, and especially the
Negro youth, too quickly or too harshly. The Negro boy has obstacles,
discouragements, and temptations to battle with that are little known
to those not situated as he is. When a white boy undertakes a task, it
is taken for granted that he will succeed. On the other hand, people
are usually surprised if the Negro boy does not fail. In a word, the
Negro youth starts out with the presumption against him.

The influence of ancestry, however, is important in helping forward any
individual or race, if too much reliance is not placed upon it. Those
who constantly direct attention to the Negro youth’s moral weaknesses,
and compare his advancement with that of white youths, do not consider
the influence of the memories which cling about the old family
homesteads. I have no idea, as I have stated elsewhere, who my
grandmother was. I have, or have had, uncles and aunts and cousins, but
I have no knowledge as to where most of them are. My case will
illustrate that of hundreds of thousands of black people in every part
of our country. The very fact that the white boy is conscious that, if
he fails in life, he will disgrace the whole family record, extending
back through many generations, is of tremendous value in helping him to
resist temptations. The fact that the individual has behind and
surrounding him proud family history and connection serves as a
stimulus to help him to overcome obstacles when striving for success.

The time that I was permitted to attend school during the day was
short, and my attendance was irregular. It was not long before I had to
stop attending day-school altogether, and devote all of my time again
to work. I resorted to the night-school again. In fact, the greater
part of the education I secured in my boyhood was gathered through the
night-school after my day’s work was done. I had difficulty often in
securing a satisfactory teacher. Sometimes, after I had secured some
one to teach me at night, I would find, much to my disappointment, that
the teacher knew but little more than I did. Often I would have to walk
several miles at night in order to recite my night-school lessons.
There was never a time in my youth, no matter how dark and discouraging
the days might be, when one resolve did not continually remain with me,
and that was a determination to secure an education at any cost.

Soon after we moved to West Virginia, my mother adopted into our
family, notwithstanding our poverty, an orphan boy, to whom afterward
we gave the name of James B. Washington. He has ever since remained a
member of the family.

After I had worked in the salt-furnace for some time, work was secured
for me in a coal-mine which was operated mainly for the purpose of
securing fuel for the salt-furnace. Work in the coal-mine I always
dreaded. One reason for this was that any one who worked in a coal-mine
was always unclean, at least while at work, and it was a very hard job
to get one’s skin clean after the day’s work was over. Then it was
fully a mile from the opening of the coal-mine to the face of the coal,
and all, of course, was in the blackest darkness. I do not believe that
one ever experiences anywhere else such darkness as he does in a
coal-mine. The mine was divided into a large number of different
“rooms” or departments, and, as I never was able to learn the location
of all these “rooms,” I many times found myself lost in the mine. To
add to the horror of being lost, sometimes my light would go out, and
then, if I did not happen to have a match, I would wander about in the
darkness until by chance I found some one to give me a light. The work
was not only hard, but it was dangerous. There was always the danger of
being blown to pieces by a premature explosion of powder, or of being
crushed by falling slate. Accidents from one or the other of these
causes were frequently occurring, and this kept me in constant fear.
Many children of the tenderest years were compelled then, as is now
true I fear, in most coal-mining districts, to spend a large part of
their lives in these coal-mines, with little opportunity to get an
education; and, what is worse, I have often noted that, as a rule,
young boys who begin life in a coal-mine are often physically and
mentally dwarfed. They soon lose ambition to do anything else than to
continue as a coal-miner.

In those days, and later as a young man, I used to try to picture in my
imagination the feelings and ambitions of a white boy with absolutely
no limit placed upon his aspirations and activities. I used to envy the
white boy who had no obstacles placed in the way of his becoming a
Congressman, Governor, Bishop, or President by reason of the accident
of his birth or race. I used to picture the way that I would act under
such circumstances; how I would begin at the bottom and keep rising
until I reached the highest round of success.

In later years, I confess that I do not envy the white boy as I once
did. I have learned that success is to be measured not so much by the
position that one has reached in life as by the obstacles which he has
overcome while trying to succeed. Looked at from this standpoint, I
almost reached the conclusion that often the Negro boy’s birth and
connection with an unpopular race is an advantage, so far as real life
is concerned. With few exceptions, the Negro youth must work harder and
must perform his tasks even better than a white youth in order to
secure recognition. But out of the hard and unusual struggle through
which he is compelled to pass, he gets a strength, a confidence, that
one misses whose pathway is comparatively smooth by reason of birth and
race.

From any point of view, I had rather be what I am, a member of the
Negro race, than be able to claim membership with the most favoured of
any other race. I have always been made sad when I have heard members
of any race claiming rights or privileges, or certain badges of
distinction, on the ground simply that they were members of this or
that race, regardless of their own individual worth or attainments. I
have been made to feel sad for such persons because I am conscious of
the fact that mere connection with what is known as a superior race
will not permanently carry an individual forward unless he has
individual worth, and mere connection with what is regarded as an
inferior race will not finally hold an individual back if he possesses
intrinsic, individual merit. Every persecuted individual and race
should get much consolation out of the great human law, which is
universal and eternal, that merit, no matter under what skin found, is,
in the long run, recognized and rewarded. This I have said here, not to
call attention to myself as an individual, but to the race to which I
am proud to belong.