Chapter IV.

Helping Others


At the end of my first year at Hampton I was confronted with another
difficulty. Most of the students went home to spend their vacation. I
had no money with which to go home, but I had to go somewhere. In those
days very few students were permitted to remain at the school during
vacation. It made me feel very sad and homesick to see the other
students preparing to leave and starting for home. I not only had no
money with which to go home, but I had none with which to go anywhere.

In some way, however, I had gotten hold of an extra, second-hand coat
which I thought was a pretty valuable coat. This I decided to sell, in
order to get a little money for travelling expenses. I had a good deal
of boyish pride, and I tried to hide, as far as I could, from the other
students the fact that I had no money and nowhere to go. I made it
known to a few people in the town of Hampton that I had this coat to
sell, and, after a good deal of persuading, one coloured man promised
to come to my room to look the coat over and consider the matter of
buying it. This cheered my drooping spirits considerably. Early the
next morning my prospective customer appeared. After looking the
garment over carefully, he asked me how much I wanted for it. I told
him I thought it was worth three dollars. He seemed to agree with me as
to price, but remarked in the most matter-of-fact way: “I tell you what
I will do; I will take the coat, and will pay you five cents, cash
down, and pay you the rest of the money just as soon as I can get it.”
It is not hard to imagine what my feelings were at the time.

With this disappointment I gave up all hope of getting out of the town
of Hampton for my vacation work. I wanted very much to go where I might
secure work that would at least pay me enough to purchase some
much-needed clothing and other necessities. In a few days practically
all the students and teachers had left for their homes, and this served
to depress my spirits even more.

After trying for several days in and near the town of Hampton, I
finally secured work in a restaurant at Fortress Monroe. The wages,
however, were very little more than my board. At night, and between
meals, I found considerable time for study and reading; and in this
direction I improved myself very much during the summer.

When I left school at the end of my first year, I owed the institution
sixteen dollars that I had not been able to work out. It was my
greatest ambition during the summer to save money enough with which to
pay this debt. I felt that this was a debt of honour, and that I could
hardly bring myself to the point of even trying to enter school again
till it was paid. I economized in every way that I could think of—did
my own washing, and went without necessary garments—but still I found
my summer vacation ending and I did not have the sixteen dollars.

One day, during the last week of my stay in the restaurant, I found
under one of the tables a crisp, new ten-dollar bill. I could hardly
contain myself, I was so happy. As it was not my place of business I
felt it to be the proper thing to show the money to the proprietor.
This I did. He seemed as glad as I was, but he coolly explained to me
that, as it was his place of business, he had a right to keep the
money, and he proceeded to do so. This, I confess, was another pretty
hard blow to me. I will not say that I became discouraged, for as I now
look back over my life I do not recall that I ever became discouraged
over anything that I set out to accomplish. I have begun everything
with the idea that I could succeed, and I never had much patience with
the multitudes of people who are always ready to explain why one cannot
succeed. I determined to face the situation just as it was. At the end
of the week I went to the treasurer of the Hampton Institute, General
J.F.B. Marshall, and told him frankly my condition. To my gratification
he told me that I could reenter the institution, and that he would
trust me to pay the debt when I could. During the second year I
continued to work as a janitor.

The education that I received at Hampton out of the text-books was but
a small part of what I learned there. One of the things that impressed
itself upon me deeply, the second year, was the unselfishness of the
teachers. It was hard for me to understand how any individuals could
bring themselves to the point where they could be so happy in working
for others. Before the end of the year, I think I began learning that
those who are happiest are those who do the most for others. This
lesson I have tried to carry with me ever since.

I also learned a valuable lesson at Hampton by coming into contact with
the best breeds of live stock and fowls. No student, I think, who has
had the opportunity of doing this could go out into the world and
content himself with the poorest grades.

Perhaps the most valuable thing that I got out of my second year was an
understanding of the use and value of the Bible. Miss Nathalie Lord,
one of the teachers, from Portland, Me., taught me how to use and love
the Bible. Before this I had never cared a great deal about it, but now
I learned to love to read the Bible, not only for the spiritual help
which it gives, but on account of it as literature. The lessons taught
me in this respect took such a hold upon me that at the present time,
when I am at home, no matter how busy I am, I always make it a rule to
read a chapter or a portion of a chapter in the morning, before
beginning the work of the day.

Whatever ability I may have as a public speaker I owe in a measure to
Miss Lord. When she found out that I had some inclination in this
direction, she gave me private lessons in the matter of breathing,
emphasis, and articulation. Simply to be able to talk in public for the
sake of talking has never had the least attraction to me. In fact, I
consider that there is nothing so empty and unsatisfactory as mere
abstract public speaking; but from my early childhood I have had a
desire to do something to make the world better, and then to be able to
speak to the world about that thing.

The debating societies at Hampton were a constant source of delight to
me. These were held on Saturday evening; and during my whole life at
Hampton I do not recall that I missed a single meeting. I not only
attended the weekly debating society, but was instrumental in
organizing an additional society. I noticed that between the time when
supper was over and the time to begin evening study there were about
twenty minutes which the young men usually spent in idle gossip. About
twenty of us formed a society for the purpose of utilizing this time in
debate or in practice in public speaking. Few persons ever derived more
happiness or benefit from the use of twenty minutes of time than we did
in this way.

At the end of my second year at Hampton, by the help of some money sent
me by my mother and brother John, supplemented by a small gift from one
of the teachers at Hampton, I was enabled to return to my home in
Malden, West Virginia, to spend my vacation. When I reached home I
found that the salt-furnaces were not running, and that the coal-mine
was not being operated on account of the miners being out on “strike.”
This was something which, it seemed, usually occurred whenever the men
got two or three months ahead in their savings. During the strike, of
course, they spent all that they had saved, and would often return to
work in debt at the same wages, or would move to another mine at
considerable expense. In either case, my observations convinced me that
the miners were worse off at the end of the strike. Before the days of
strikes in that section of the country, I knew miners who had
considerable money in the bank, but as soon as the professional labour
agitators got control, the savings of even the more thrifty ones began
disappearing.

My mother and the other members of my family were, of course, much
rejoiced to see me and to note the improvement that I had made during
my two years’ absence. The rejoicing on the part of all classes of the
coloured people, and especially the older ones, over my return, was
almost pathetic. I had to pay a visit to each family and take a meal
with each, and at each place tell the story of my experiences at
Hampton. In addition to this I had to speak before the church and
Sunday-school, and at various other places. The thing that I was most
in search of, though, work, I could not find. There was no work on
account of the strike. I spent nearly the whole of the first month of
my vacation in an effort to find something to do by which I could earn
money to pay my way back to Hampton and save a little money to use
after reaching there.

Toward the end of the first month, I went to a place a considerable
distance from my home, to try to find employment. I did not succeed,
and it was night before I got started on my return. When I had gotten
within a mile or so of my home I was so completely tired out that I
could not walk any farther, and I went into an old, abandoned house to
spend the remainder of the night. About three o’clock in the morning my
brother John found me asleep in this house, and broke to me, as gently
as he could, the sad news that our dear mother had died during the
night.

This seemed to me the saddest and blankest moment in my life. For
several years my mother had not been in good health, but I had no idea,
when I parted from her the previous day, that I should never see her
alive again. Besides that, I had always had an intense desire to be
with her when she did pass away. One of the chief ambitions which
spurred me on at Hampton was that I might be able to get to be in a
position in which I could better make my mother comfortable and happy.
She had so often expressed the wish that she might be permitted to live
to see her children educated and started out in the world.

In a very short time after the death of my mother our little home was
in confusion. My sister Amanda, although she tried to do the best she
could, was too young to know anything about keeping house, and my
stepfather was not able to hire a housekeeper. Sometimes we had food
cooked for us, and sometimes we did not. I remember that more than once
a can of tomatoes and some crackers constituted a meal. Our clothing
went uncared for, and everything about our home was soon in a
tumble-down condition. It seems to me that this was the most dismal
period of my life.

My good friend, Mrs. Ruffner, to whom I have already referred, always
made me welcome at her home, and assisted me in many ways during this
trying period. Before the end of the vacation she gave me some work,
and this, together with work in a coal-mine at some distance from my
home, enabled me to earn a little money.

At one time it looked as if I would have to give up the idea of
returning to Hampton, but my heart was so set on returning that I
determined not to give up going back without a struggle. I was very
anxious to secure some clothes for the winter, but in this I was
disappointed, except for a few garments which my brother John secured
for me. Notwithstanding my need of money and clothing, I was very happy
in the fact that I had secured enough money to pay my travelling
expenses back to Hampton. Once there, I knew that I could make myself
so useful as a janitor that I could in some way get through the school
year.

Three weeks before the time for the opening of the term at Hampton, I
was pleasantly surprised to receive a letter from my good friend Miss
Mary F. Mackie, the lady principal, asking me to return to Hampton two
weeks before the opening of the school, in order that I might assist
her in cleaning the buildings and getting things in order for the new
school year. This was just the opportunity I wanted. It gave me a
chance to secure a credit in the treasurer’s office. I started for
Hampton at once.

During these two weeks I was taught a lesson which I shall never
forget. Miss Mackie was a member of one of the oldest and most cultured
families of the North, and yet for two weeks she worked by my side
cleaning windows, dusting rooms, putting beds in order, and what not.
She felt that things would not be in condition for the opening of
school unless every window-pane was perfectly clean, and she took the
greatest satisfaction in helping to clean them herself. The work which
I have described she did every year that I was at Hampton.

It was hard for me at this time to understand how a woman of her
education and social standing could take such delight in performing
such service, in order to assist in the elevation of an unfortunate
race. Ever since then I have had no patience with any school for my
race in the South which did not teach its students the dignity of
labour.

During my last year at Hampton every minute of my time that was not
occupied with my duties as janitor was devoted to hard study. I was
determined, if possible, to make such a record in my class as would
cause me to be placed on the “honour roll” of Commencement speakers.
This I was successful in doing. It was June of 1875 when I finished the
regular course of study at Hampton. The greatest benefits that I got
out of my my life at the Hampton Institute, perhaps, may be classified
under two heads:—

First was contact with a great man, General S.C. Armstrong, who, I
repeat, was, in my opinion, the rarest, strongest, and most beautiful
character that it has ever been my privilege to meet.

Second, at Hampton, for the first time, I learned what education was
expected to do for an individual. Before going there I had a good deal
of the then rather prevalent idea among our people that to secure an
education meant to have a good, easy time, free from all necessity for
manual labour. At Hampton I not only learned that it was not a disgrace
to labour, but learned to love labour, not alone for its financial
value, but for labour’s own sake and for the independence and
self-reliance which the ability to do something which the world wants
done brings. At that institution I got my first taste of what it meant
to live a life of unselfishness, my first knowledge of the fact that
the happiest individuals are those who do the most to make others
useful and happy.

I was completely out of money when I graduated. In company with other
Hampton students, I secured a place as a table waiter in a summer hotel
in Connecticut, and managed to borrow enough money with which to get
there. I had not been in this hotel long before I found out that I knew
practically nothing about waiting on a hotel table. The head waiter,
however, supposed that I was an accomplished waiter. He soon gave me
charge of the table at which there sat four or five wealthy and rather
aristocratic people. My ignorance of how to wait upon them was so
apparent that they scolded me in such a severe manner that I became
frightened and left their table, leaving them sitting there without
food. As a result of this I was reduced from the position of waiter to
that of a dish-carrier.

But I determined to learn the business of waiting, and did so within a
few weeks and was restored to my former position. I have had the
satisfaction of being a guest in this hotel several times since I was a
waiter there.

At the close of the hotel season I returned to my former home in
Malden, and was elected to teach the coloured school at that place.
This was the beginning of one of the happiest periods of my life. I now
felt that I had the opportunity to help the people of my home town to a
higher life. I felt from the first that mere book education was not all
that the young people of that town needed. I began my work at eight
o’clock in the morning, and, as a rule, it did not end until ten
o’clock at night. In addition to the usual routine of teaching, I
taught the pupils to comb their hair, and to keep their hands and faces
clean, as well as their clothing. I gave special attention to teaching
them the proper use of the tooth-brush and the bath. In all my teaching
I have watched carefully the influence of the tooth-brush, and I am
convinced that there are few single agencies of civilization that are
more far-reaching.

There were so many of the older boys and girls in the town, as well as
men and women, who had to work in the daytime and still were craving an
opportunity for an education, that I soon opened a night-school. From
the first, this was crowded every night, being about as large as the
school that I taught in the day. The efforts of some of the men and
women, who in many cases were over fifty years of age, to learn, were
in some cases very pathetic.

My day and night school work was not all that I undertook. I
established a small reading-room and a debating society. On Sundays I
taught two Sunday-schools, one in the town of Malden in the afternoon,
and the other in the morning at a place three miles distant from
Malden. In addition to this, I gave private lessons to several young
men whom I was fitting to send to the Hampton Institute. Without regard
to pay and with little thought of it, I taught any one who wanted to
learn anything that I could teach him. I was supremely happy in the
opportunity of being able to assist somebody else. I did receive,
however, a small salary from the public fund, for my work as a
public-school teacher.

During the time that I was a student at Hampton my older brother, John,
not only assisted me all that he could, but worked all of the time in
the coal-mines in order to support the family. He willingly neglected
his own education that he might help me. It was my earnest wish to help
him to prepare to enter Hampton, and to save money to assist him in his
expenses there. Both of these objects I was successful in
accomplishing. In three years my brother finished the course at
Hampton, and he is now holding the important position of Superintendent
of Industries at Tuskegee. When he returned from Hampton, we both
combined our efforts and savings to send our adopted brother, James,
through the Hampton Institute. This we succeeded in doing, and he is
now the postmaster at the Tuskegee Institute. The year 1877, which was
my second year of teaching in Malden, I spent very much as I did the
first.

It was while my home was at Malden that what was known as the “Ku Klux
Klan” was in the height of its activity. The “Ku Klux” were bands of
men who had joined themselves together for the purpose of regulating
the conduct of the coloured people, especially with the object of
preventing the members of the race from exercising any influence in
politics. They corresponded somewhat to the “patrollers” of whom I used
to hear a great deal during the days of slavery, when I was a small
boy. The “patrollers” were bands of white men—usually young men—who
were organized largely for the purpose of regulating the conduct of the
slaves at night in such matters as preventing the slaves from going
from one plantation to another without passes, and for preventing them
from holding any kind of meetings without permission and without the
presence at these meetings of at least one white man.

Like the “patrollers” the “Ku Klux” operated almost wholly at night.
They were, however, more cruel than the “patrollers.” Their objects, in
the main, were to crush out the political aspirations of the Negroes,
but they did not confine themselves to this, because schoolhouses as
well as churches were burned by them, and many innocent persons were
made to suffer. During this period not a few coloured people lost their
lives.

As a young man, the acts of these lawless bands made a great impression
upon me. I saw one open battle take place at Malden between some of the
coloured and white people. There must have been not far from a hundred
persons engaged on each side; many on both sides were seriously
injured, among them General Lewis Ruffner, the husband of my friend
Mrs. Viola Ruffner. General Ruffner tried to defend the coloured
people, and for this he was knocked down and so seriously wounded that
he never completely recovered. It seemed to me as I watched this
struggle between members of the two races, that there was no hope for
our people in this country. The “Ku Klux” period was, I think, the
darkest part of the Reconstruction days.

I have referred to this unpleasant part of the history of the South
simply for the purpose of calling attention to the great change that
has taken place since the days of the “Ku Klux.” To-day there are no
such organizations in the South, and the fact that such ever existed is
almost forgotten by both races. There are few places in the South now
where public sentiment would permit such organizations to exist.