Chapter VIII.

Teaching School In A Stable And A Hen-House


I confess that what I saw during my month of travel and investigation
left me with a very heavy heart. The work to be done in order to lift
these people up seemed almost beyond accomplishing. I was only one
person, and it seemed to me that the little effort which I could put
forth could go such a short distance toward bringing about results. I
wondered if I could accomplish anything, and if it were worth while for
me to try.

Of one thing I felt more strongly convinced than ever, after spending
this month in seeing the actual life of the coloured people, and that
was that, in order to lift them up, something must be done more than
merely to imitate New England education as it then existed. I saw more
clearly than ever the wisdom of the system which General Armstrong had
inaugurated at Hampton. To take the children of such people as I had
been among for a month, and each day give them a few hours of mere book
education, I felt would be almost a waste of time.

After consultation with the citizens of Tuskegee, I set July 4, 1881,
as the day for the opening of the school in the little shanty and
church which had been secured for its accommodation. The white people,
as well as the coloured, were greatly interested in the starting of the
new school, and the opening day was looked forward to with much earnest
discussion. There were not a few white people in the vicinity of
Tuskegee who looked with some disfavour upon the project. They
questioned its value to the coloured people, and had a fear that it
might result in bringing about trouble between the races. Some had the
feeling that in proportion as the Negro received education, in the same
proportion would his value decrease as an economic factor in the state.
These people feared the result of education would be that the Negroes
would leave the farms, and that it would be difficult to secure them
for domestic service.

The white people who questioned the wisdom of starting this new school
had in their minds pictures of what was called an educated Negro, with
a high hat, imitation gold eye-glasses, a showy walking-stick, kid
gloves, fancy boots, and what not—in a word, a man who was determined
to live by his wits. It was difficult for these people to see how
education would produce any other kind of a coloured man.

In the midst of all the difficulties which I encountered in getting the
little school started, and since then through a period of nineteen
years, there are two men among all the many friends of the school in
Tuskegee upon whom I have depended constantly for advice and guidance;
and the success of the undertaking is largely due to these men, from
whom I have never sought anything in vain. I mention them simply as
types. One is a white man and an ex-slaveholder, Mr. George W.
Campbell; the other is a black man and an ex-slave, Mr. Lewis Adams.
These were the men who wrote to General Armstrong for a teacher.

Mr. Campbell is a merchant and banker, and had had little experience in
dealing with matters pertaining to education. Mr. Adams was a mechanic,
and had learned the trades of shoemaking, harness-making, and
tinsmithing during the days of slavery. He had never been to school a
day in his life, but in some way he had learned to read and write while
a slave. From the first, these two men saw clearly what my plan of
education was, sympathized with me, and supported me in every effort.
In the days which were darkest financially for the school, Mr. Campbell
was never appealed to when he was not willing to extend all the aid in
his power. I do not know two men, one an ex-slaveholder, one an
ex-slave, whose advice and judgment I would feel more like following in
everything which concerns the life and development of the school at
Tuskegee than those of these two men.

I have always felt that Mr. Adams, in a large degree, derived his
unusual power of mind from the training given his hands in the process
of mastering well three trades during the days of slavery. If one goes
to-day into any Southern town, and asks for the leading and most
reliable coloured man in the community, I believe that in five cases
out of ten he will be directed to a Negro who learned a trade during
the days of slavery.

On the morning that the school opened, thirty students reported for
admission. I was the only teacher. The students were about equally
divided between the sexes. Most of them lived in Macon County, the
county in which Tuskegee is situated, and of which it is the
county-seat. A great many more students wanted to enter the school, but
it had been decided to receive only those who were above fifteen years
of age, and who had previously received some education. The greater
part of the thirty were public-school teachers, and some of them were
nearly forty years of age. With the teachers came some of their former
pupils, and when they were examined it was amusing to note that in
several cases the pupil entered a higher class than did his former
teacher. It was also interesting to note how many big books some of
them had studied, and how many high-sounding subjects some of them
claimed to have mastered. The bigger the book and the longer the name
of the subject, the prouder they felt of their accomplishment. Some had
studied Latin, and one or two Greek. This they thought entitled them to
special distinction.

In fact, one of the saddest things I saw during the month of travel
which I have described was a young man, who had attended some high
school, sitting down in a one-room cabin, with grease on his clothing,
filth all around him, and weeds in the yard and garden, engaged in
studying a French grammar.

The students who came first seemed to be fond of memorizing long and
complicated “rules” in grammar and mathematics, but had little thought
or knowledge of applying these rules to their everyday affairs of their
life. One subject which they liked to talk about, and tell me that they
had mastered, in arithmetic, was “banking and discount,” but I soon
found out that neither they nor almost any one in the neighbourhood in
which they had lived had ever had a bank account. In registering the
names of the students, I found that almost every one of them had one or
more middle initials. When I asked what the “J” stood for, in the name
of John J. Jones, it was explained to me that this was a part of his
“entitles.” Most of the students wanted to get an education because
they thought it would enable them to earn more money as
school-teachers.

Notwithstanding what I have said about them in these respects, I have
never seen a more earnest and willing company of young men and women
than these students were. They were all willing to learn the right
thing as soon as it was shown them what was right. I was determined to
start them off on a solid and thorough foundation, so far as their
books were concerned. I soon learned that most of them had the merest
smattering of the high-sounding things that they had studied. While
they could locate the Desert of Sahara or the capital of China on an
artificial globe, I found out that the girls could not locate the
proper places for the knives and forks on an actual dinner-table, or
the places on which the bread and meat should be set.

I had to summon a good deal of courage to take a student who had been
studying cube root and “banking and discount,” and explain to him that
the wisest thing for him to do first was thoroughly master the
multiplication table.

The number of pupils increased each week, until by the end of the first
month there were nearly fifty. Many of them, however, said that, as
they could remain only for two or three months, they wanted to enter a
high class and get a diploma the first year if possible.

At the end of the first six weeks a new and rare face entered the
school as a co-teacher. This was Miss Olivia A. Davidson, who later
became my wife. Miss Davidson was born in Ohio, and received her
preparatory education in the public schools of that state. When little
more than a girl, she heard of the need of teachers in the South. She
went to the state of Mississippi and began teaching there. Later she
taught in the city of Memphis. While teaching in Mississippi, one of
her pupils became ill with smallpox. Every one in the community was so
frightened that no one would nurse the boy. Miss Davidson closed her
school and remained by the bedside of the boy night and day until he
recovered. While she was at her Ohio home on her vacation, the worst
epidemic of yellow fever broke out in Memphis, Tenn., that perhaps has
ever occurred in the South. When she heard of this, she at once
telegraphed the Mayor of Memphis, offering her services as a
yellow-fever nurse, although she had never had the disease.

Miss Davidon’s experience in the South showed her that the people
needed something more than mere book-learning. She heard of the Hampton
system of education, and decided that this was what she wanted in order
to prepare herself for better work in the South. The attention of Mrs.
Mary Hemenway, of Boston, was attracted to her rare ability. Through
Mrs. Hemenway’s kindness and generosity, Miss Davidson, after
graduating at Hampton, received an opportunity to complete a two years’
course of training at the Massachusetts State Normal School at
Framingham.

Before she went to Framingham, some one suggested to Miss Davidson
that, since she was so very light in colour, she might find it more
comfortable not to be known as a coloured women in this school in
Massachusetts. She at once replied that under no circumstances and for
no considerations would she consent to deceive any one in regard to her
racial identity.

Soon after her graduation from the Framingham institution, Miss
Davidson came to Tuskegee, bringing into the school many valuable and
fresh ideas as to the best methods of teaching, as well as a rare moral
character and a life of unselfishness that I think has seldom been
equalled. No single individual did more toward laying the foundations
of the Tuskegee Institute so as to insure the successful work that has
been done there than Olivia A. Davidson.

Miss Davidson and I began consulting as to the future of the school
from the first. The students were making progress in learning books and
in developing their minds; but it became apparent at once that, if we
were to make any permanent impression upon those who had come to us for
training we must do something besides teach them mere books. The
students had come from homes where they had had no opportunities for
lessons which would teach them how to care for their bodies. With few
exceptions, the homes in Tuskegee in which the students boarded were
but little improvement upon those from which they had come. We wanted
to teach the students how to bathe; how to care for their teeth and
clothing. We wanted to teach them what to eat, and how to eat it
properly, and how to care for their rooms. Aside from this, we wanted
to give them such a practical knowledge of some one industry, together
with the spirit of industry, thrift, and economy, that they would be
sure of knowing how to make a living after they had left us. We wanted
to teach them to study actual things instead of mere books alone.

We found that the most of our students came from the country districts,
where agriculture in some form or other was the main dependence of the
people. We learned that about eighty-five per cent of the coloured
people in the Gulf states depended upon agriculture for their living.
Since this was true, we wanted to be careful not to educate our
students out of sympathy with agricultural life, so that they would be
attracted from the country to the cities, and yield to the temptation
of trying to live by their wits. We wanted to give them such an
education as would fit a large proportion of them to be teachers, and
at the same time cause them to return to the plantation districts and
show the people there how to put new energy and new ideas into farming,
as well as into the intellectual and moral and religious life of the
people.

All these ideas and needs crowded themselves upon us with a seriousness
that seemed well-nigh overwhelming. What were we to do? We had only the
little old shanty and the abandoned church which the good coloured
people of the town of Tuskegee had kindly loaned us for the
accommodation of the classes. The number of students was increasing
daily. The more we saw of them, and the more we travelled through the
country districts, the more we saw that our efforts were reaching, to
only a partial degree, the actual needs of the people whom we wanted to
lift up through the medium of the students whom we should educate and
send out as leaders.

The more we talked with the students, who were then coming to us from
several parts of the state, the more we found that the chief ambition
among a large proportion of them was to get an education so that they
would not have to work any longer with their hands.

This is illustrated by a story told of a coloured man in Alabama, who,
one hot day in July, while he was at work in a cotton-field, suddenly
stopped, and, looking toward the skies, said: “O Lawd, de cotton am so
grassy, de work am so hard, and the sun am so hot dat I b’lieve dis
darky am called to preach!”

About three months after the opening of the school, and at the time
when we were in the greatest anxiety about our work, there came into
market for sale an old and abandoned plantation which was situated
about a mile from the town of Tuskegee. The mansion house—or “big
house,” as it would have been called—which had been occupied by the
owners during slavery, had been burned. After making a careful
examination of the place, it seemed to be just the location that we
wanted in order to make our work effective and permanent.

But how were we to get it? The price asked for it was very little—only
five hundred dollars—but we had no money, and we were strangers in the
town and had no credit. The owner of the land agreed to let us occupy
the place if we could make a payment of two hundred and fifty dollars
down, with the understanding that the remaining two hundred and fifty
dollars must be paid within a year. Although five hundred dollars was
cheap for the land, it was a large sum when one did not have any part
of it.

In the midst of the difficulty I summoned a great deal of courage and
wrote to my friend General J.F.B. Marshall, the Treasurer of the
Hampton Institute, putting the situation before him and beseeching him
to lend me the two hundred and fifty dollars on my own personal
responsibility. Within a few days a reply came to the effect that he
had no authority to lend me the money belonging to the Hampton
Institute, but that he would gladly lend me the amount needed from his
own personal funds.

I confess that the securing of this money in this way was a great
surprise to me, as well as a source of gratification. Up to that time I
never had had in my possession so much money as one hundred dollars at
a time, and the loan which I had asked General Marshall for seemed a
tremendously large sum to me. The fact of my being responsible for the
repaying of such a large amount of money weighed very heavily upon me.

I lost no time in getting ready to move the school on to the new farm.
At the time we occupied the place there were standing upon it a cabin,
formerly used as a dining room, an old kitchen, a stable, and an old
hen-house. Within a few weeks we had all of these structures in use.
The stable was repaired and used as a recitation-room, and very
presently the hen-house was utilized for the same purpose.

I recall that one morning, when I told an old coloured man who lived
near, and who sometimes helped me, that our school had grown so large
that it would be necessary for us to use the hen-house for school
purposes, and that I wanted him to help me give it a thorough cleaning
out the next day, he replied, in the most earnest manner: “What you
mean, boss? You sholy ain’t gwine clean out de hen-house in de
day-time?”

Nearly all the work of getting the new location ready for school
purposes was done by the students after school was over in the
afternoon. As soon as we got the cabins in condition to be used, I
determined to clear up some land so that we could plant a crop. When I
explained my plan to the young men, I noticed that they did not seem to
take to it very kindly. It was hard for them to see the connection
between clearing land and an education. Besides, many of them had been
school-teachers, and they questioned whether or not clearing land would
be in keeping with their dignity. In order to relieve them from any
embarrassment, each afternoon after school I took my axe and led the
way to the woods. When they saw that I was not afraid or ashamed to
work, they began to assist with more enthusiasm. We kept at the work
each afternoon, until we had cleared about twenty acres and had planted
a crop.

In the meantime Miss Davidson was devising plans to repay the loan. Her
first effort was made by holding festivals, or “suppers.” She made a
personal canvass among the white and coloured families in the town of
Tuskegee, and got them to agree to give something, like a cake, a
chicken, bread, or pies, that could be sold at the festival. Of course
the coloured people were glad to give anything that they could spare,
but I want to add that Miss Davidson did not apply to a single white
family, so far as I now remember, that failed to donate something; and
in many ways the white families showed their interest in the school.

Several of these festivals were held, and quite a little sum of money
was raised. A canvass was also made among the people of both races for
direct gifts of money, and most of those applied to gave small sums. It
was often pathetic to note the gifts of the older coloured people, most
of whom had spent their best days in slavery. Sometimes they would give
five cents, sometimes twenty-five cents. Sometimes the contribution was
a quilt, or a quantity of sugarcane. I recall one old coloured women
who was about seventy years of age, who came to see me when we were
raising money to pay for the farm. She hobbled into the room where I
was, leaning on a cane. She was clad in rags; but they were clean. She
said: “Mr. Washin’ton, God knows I spent de bes’ days of my life in
slavery. God knows I’s ignorant an’ poor; but,” she added, “I knows
what you an’ Miss Davidson is tryin’ to do. I knows you is tryin’ to
make better men an’ better women for de coloured race. I ain’t got no
money, but I wants you to take dese six eggs, what I’s been savin’ up,
an’ I wants you to put dese six eggs into the eddication of dese boys
an’ gals.”

Since the work at Tuskegee started, it has been my privilege to receive
many gifts for the benefit of the institution, but never any, I think,
that touched me so deeply as this one.