Chapter XII.

Raising Money


When we opened our boarding department, we provided rooms in the attic
of Porter Hall, our first building, for a number of girls. But the
number of students, of both sexes, continued to increase. We could find
rooms outside the school grounds for many of the young men, but the
girls we did not care to expose in this way. Very soon the problem of
providing more rooms for the girls, as well as a larger boarding
department for all the students, grew serious. As a result, we finally
decided to undertake the construction of a still larger building—a
building that would contain rooms for the girls and boarding
accommodations for all.

After having had a preliminary sketch of the needed building made, we
found that it would cost about ten thousand dollars. We had no money
whatever with which to begin; still we decided to give the needed
building a name. We knew we could name it, even though we were in doubt
about our ability to secure the means for its construction. We decided
to call the proposed building Alabama Hall, in honour of the state in
which we were labouring. Again Miss Davidson began making efforts to
enlist the interest and help of the coloured and white people in and
near Tuskegee. They responded willingly, in proportion to their means.
The students, as in the case of our first building, Porter Hall, began
digging out the dirt in order to allow the laying of the foundations.

When we seemed at the end of our resources, so far as securing money
was concerned, something occurred which showed the greatness of General
Armstrong—something which proved how far he was above the ordinary
individual. When we were in the midst of great anxiety as to where and
how we were to get funds for the new building, I received a telegram
from General Armstrong asking me if I could spend a month travelling
with him through the North, and asking me, if I could do so, to come to
Hampton at once. Of course I accepted General Armstrong’s invitation,
and went to Hampton immediately. On arriving there I found that the
General had decided to take a quartette of singers through the North,
and hold meetings for a month in important cities, at which meetings he
and I were to speak. Imagine my surprise when the General told me,
further, that these meetings were to be held, not in the interests of
Hampton, but in the interests of Tuskegee, and that the Hampton
Institute was to be responsible for all the expenses.

Although he never told me so in so many words, I found that General
Armstrong took this method of introducing me to the people of the
North, as well as for the sake of securing some immediate funds to be
used in the erection of Alabama Hall. A weak and narrow man would have
reasoned that all the money which came to Tuskegee in this way would be
just so much taken from the Hampton Institute; but none of these
selfish or short-sighted feelings ever entered the breast of General
Armstrong. He was too big to be little, too good to be mean. He knew
that the people in the North who gave money gave it for the purpose of
helping the whole cause of Negro civilization, and not merely for the
advancement of any one school. The General knew, too, that the way to
strengthen Hampton was to make it a centre of unselfish power in the
working out of the whole Southern problem.

In regard to the addresses which I was to make in the North, I recall
just one piece of advice which the General gave me. He said: “Give them
an idea for every word.” I think it would be hard to improve upon this
advice; and it might be made to apply to all public speaking. From that
time to the present I have always tried to keep his advice in mind.

Meetings were held in New York, Brooklyn, Boston, Philadelphia, and
other large cities, and at all of these meetings General Armstrong
pleaded, together with myself, for help, not for Hampton, but for
Tuskegee. At these meetings an especial effort was made to secure help
for the building of Alabama Hall, as well as to introduce the school to
the attention of the general public. In both these respects the
meetings proved successful.

After that kindly introduction I began going North alone to secure
funds. During the last fifteen years I have been compelled to spend a
large proportion of my time away from the school, in an effort to
secure money to provide for the growing needs of the institution. In my
efforts to get funds I have had some experiences that may be of
interest to my readers. Time and time again I have been asked, by
people who are trying to secure money for philanthropic purposes, what
rule or rules I followed to secure the interest and help of people who
were able to contribute money to worthy objects. As far as the science
of what is called begging can be reduced to rules, I would say that I
have had but two rules. First, always to do my whole duty regarding
making our work known to individuals and organizations; and, second,
not to worry about the results. This second rule has been the hardest
for me to live up to. When bills are on the eve of falling due, with
not a dollar in hand with which to meet them, it is pretty difficult to
learn not to worry, although I think I am learning more and more each
year that all worry simply consumes, and to no purpose, just so much
physical and mental strength that might otherwise be given to effective
work. After considerable experience in coming into contact with wealthy
and noted men, I have observed that those who have accomplished the
greatest results are those who “keep under the body”; are those who
never grow excited or lose self-control, but are always calm,
self-possessed, patient, and polite. I think that President William
McKinley is the best example of a man of this class that I have ever
seen.

In order to be successful in any kind of undertaking, I think the main
thing is for one to grow to the point where he completely forgets
himself; that is, to lose himself in a great cause. In proportion as
one loses himself in the way, in the same degree does he get the
highest happiness out of his work.

My experience in getting money for Tuskegee has taught me to have no
patience with those people who are always condemning the rich because
they are rich, and because they do not give more to objects of charity.
In the first place, those who are guilty of such sweeping criticisms do
not know how many people would be made poor, and how much suffering
would result, if wealthy people were to part all at once with any large
proportion of their wealth in a way to disorganize and cripple great
business enterprises. Then very few persons have any idea of the large
number of applications for help that rich people are constantly being
flooded with. I know wealthy people who receive as much as twenty calls
a day for help. More than once when I have gone into the offices of
rich men, I have found half a dozen persons waiting to see them, and
all come for the same purpose, that of securing money. And all these
calls in person, to say nothing of the applications received through
the mails. Very few people have any idea of the amount of money given
away by persons who never permit their names to be known. I have often
heard persons condemned for not giving away money, who, to my own
knowledge, were giving away thousands of dollars every year so quietly
that the world knew nothing about it.

As an example of this, there are two ladies in New York, whose names
rarely appear in print, but who, in a quiet way, have given us the
means with which to erect three large and important buildings during
the last eight years. Besides the gift of these buildings, they have
made other generous donations to the school. And they not only help
Tuskegee, but they are constantly seeking opportunities to help other
worthy causes.

Although it has been my privilege to be the medium through which a good
many hundred thousand dollars have been received for the work at
Tuskegee, I have always avoided what the world calls “begging.” I often
tell people that I have never “begged” any money, and that I am not a
“beggar.” My experience and observation have convinced me that
persistent asking outright for money from the rich does not, as a rule,
secure help. I have usually proceeded on the principle that persons who
possess sense enough to earn money have sense enough to know how to
give it away, and that the mere making known of the facts regarding
Tuskegee, and especially the facts regarding the work of the graduates,
has been more effective than outright begging. I think that the
presentation of facts, on a high, dignified plane, is all the begging
that most rich people care for.

While the work of going from door to door and from office to office is
hard, disagreeable, and costly in bodily strength, yet it has some
compensations. Such work gives one a rare opportunity to study human
nature. It also has its compensations in giving one an opportunity to
meet some of the best people in the world—to be more correct, I think I
should say the best people in the world. When one takes a broad survey
of the country, he will find that the most useful and influential
people in it are those who take the deepest interest in institutions
that exist for the purpose of making the world better.

At one time, when I was in Boston, I called at the door of a rather
wealthy lady, and was admitted to the vestibule and sent up my card.
While I was waiting for an answer, her husband came in, and asked me in
the most abrupt manner what I wanted. When I tried to explain the
object of my call, he became still more ungentlemanly in his words and
manner, and finally grew so excited that I left the house without
waiting for a reply from the lady. A few blocks from that house I
called to see a gentleman who received me in the most cordial manner.
He wrote me his check for a generous sum, and then, before I had had an
opportunity to thank him, said: “I am so grateful to you, Mr.
Washington, for giving me the opportunity to help a good cause. It is a
privilege to have a share in it. We in Boston are constantly indebted
to you for doing our work.” My experience in securing money convinces
me that the first type of man is growing more rare all the time, and
that the latter type is increasing; that is, that, more and more, rich
people are coming to regard men and women who apply to them for help
for worthy objects, not as beggars, but as agents for doing their work.

In the city of Boston I have rarely called upon an individual for funds
that I have not been thanked for calling, usually before I could get an
opportunity to thank the donor for the money. In that city the donors
seem to feel, in a large degree, that an honour is being conferred upon
them in their being permitted to give. Nowhere else have I met with, in
so large a measure, this fine and Christlike spirit as in the city of
Boston, although there are many notable instances of it outside that
city. I repeat my belief that the world is growing in the direction of
giving. I repeat that the main rule by which I have been guided in
collecting money is to do my full duty in regard to giving people who
have money an opportunity for help.

In the early years of the Tuskegee school I walked the streets or
travelled country roads in the North for days and days without
receiving a dollar. Often as it happened, when during the week I had
been disappointed in not getting a cent from the very individuals from
whom I most expected help, and when I was almost broken down and
discouraged, that generous help has come from some one who I had had
little idea would give at all.

I recall that on one occasion I obtained information that led me to
believe that a gentleman who lived about two miles out in the country
from Stamford, Conn., might become interested in our efforts at
Tuskegee if our conditions and needs were presented to him. On an
unusually cold and stormy day I walked the two miles to see him. After
some difficulty I succeeded in securing an interview with him. He
listened with some degree of interest to what I had to say, but did not
give me anything. I could not help having the feeling that, in a
measure, the three hours that I had spent in seeing him had been thrown
away. Still, I had followed my usual rule of doing my duty. If I had
not seen him, I should have felt unhappy over neglect of duty.

Two years after this visit a letter came to Tuskegee from this man,
which read like this: “Enclosed I send you a New York draft for ten
thousand dollars, to be used in furtherance of your work. I had placed
this sum in my will for your school, but deem it wiser to give it to
you while I live. I recall with pleasure your visit to me two years
ago.”

I can hardly imagine any occurrence which could have given me more
genuine satisfaction than the receipt of this draft. It was by far the
largest single donation which up to that time the school had ever
received. It came at a time when an unusually long period had passed
since we had received any money. We were in great distress because of
lack of funds, and the nervous strain was tremendous. It is difficult
for me to think of any situation that is more trying on the nerves than
that of conducting a large institution, with heavy obligations to meet,
without knowing where the money is to come from to meet these
obligations from month to month.

In our case I felt a double responsibility, and this made the anxiety
all the more intense. If the institution had been officered by white
persons, and had failed, it would have injured the cause of Negro
education; but I knew that the failure of our institution, officered by
Negroes, would not only mean the loss of a school, but would cause
people, in a large degree, to lose faith in the ability of the entire
race. The receipt of this draft for ten thousand dollars, under all
these circumstances, partially lifted a burden that had been pressing
down upon me for days.

From the beginning of our work to the present I have always had the
feeling, and lose no opportunity to impress our teachers with the same
idea, that the school will always be supported in proportion as the
inside of the institution is kept clean and pure and wholesome.

The first time I ever saw the late Collis P. Huntington, the great
railroad man, he gave me two dollars for our school. The last time I
saw him, which was a few months before he died, he gave me fifty
thousand dollars toward our endowment fund. Between these two gifts
there were others of generous proportions which came every year from
both Mr. and Mrs. Huntington.

Some people may say that it was Tuskegee’s good luck that brought to us
this gift of fifty thousand dollars. No, it was not luck. It was hard
work. Nothing ever comes to me, that is worth having, except as the
result of hard work. When Mr. Huntington gave me the first two dollars,
I did not blame him for not giving me more, but made up my mind that I
was going to convince him by tangible results that we were worthy of
larger gifts. For a dozen years I made a strong effort to convince Mr.
Huntington of the value of our work. I noted that just in proportion as
the usefulness of the school grew, his donations increased. Never did I
meet an individual who took a more kindly and sympathetic interest in
our school than did Mr. Huntington. He not only gave money to us, but
took time in which to advise me, as a father would a son, about the
general conduct of the school.

More than once I have found myself in some pretty tight places while
collecting money in the North. The following incident I have never
related but once before, for the reason that I feared that people would
not believe it. One morning I found myself in Providence, Rhode Island,
without a cent of money with which to buy breakfast. In crossing the
street to see a lady from whom I hoped to get some money, I found a
bright new twenty-five-cent piece in the middle of the street track. I
not only had this twenty-five cents for my breakfast, but within a few
minutes I had a donation from the lady on whom I had started to call.

At one of our Commencements I was bold enough to invite the Rev. E.
Winchester Donald, D.D., rector of Trinity Church, Boston, to preach
the Commencement sermon. As we then had no room large enough to
accommodate all who would be present, the place of meeting was under a
large improvised arbour, built partly of brush and partly of rough
boards. Soon after Dr. Donald had begun speaking, the rain came down in
torrents, and he had to stop, while someone held an umbrella over him.

The boldness of what I had done never dawned upon me until I saw the
picture made by the rector of Trinity Church standing before that large
audience under an old umbrella, waiting for the rain to cease so that
he could go on with his address.

It was not very long before the rain ceased and Dr. Donald finished his
sermon; and an excellent sermon it was, too, in spite of the weather.
After he had gone to his room, and had gotten the wet threads of his
clothes dry, Dr. Donald ventured the remark that a large chapel at
Tuskegee would not be out of place. The next day a letter came from two
ladies who were then travelling in Italy, saying that they had decided
to give us the money for such a chapel as we needed.

A short time ago we received twenty thousand dollars from Mr. Andrew
Carnegie, to be used for the purpose of erecting a new library
building. Our first library and reading-room were in a corner of a
shanty, and the whole thing occupied a space about five by twelve feet.
It required ten years of work before I was able to secure Mr.
Carnegie’s interest and help. The first time I saw him, ten years ago,
he seemed to take but little interest in our school, but I was
determined to show him that we were worthy of his help. After ten years
of hard work I wrote him a letter reading as follows:

December 15, 1900.

Mr. Andrew Carnegie, 5 W. Fifty-first St., New York.

Dear Sir: Complying with the request which you made of me when I saw
you at your residence a few days ago, I now submit in writing an appeal
for a library building for our institution.

We have 1100 students, 86 officers and instructors, together with their
families, and about 200 coloured people living near the school, all of
whom would make use of the library building.

We have over 12,000 books, periodicals, etc., gifts from our friends,
but we have no suitable place for them, and we have no suitable
reading-room.

Our graduates go to work in every section of the South, and whatever
knowledge might be obtained in the library would serve to assist in the
elevation of the whole Negro race.

Such a building as we need could be erected for about $20,000. All of
the work for the building, such as brickmaking, brick-masonry,
carpentry, blacksmithing, etc., would be done by the students. The
money which you would give would not only supply the building, but the
erection of the building would give a large number of students an
opportunity to learn the building trades, and the students would use
the money paid to them to keep themselves in school. I do not believe
that a similar amount of money often could be made go so far in
uplifting a whole race.

If you wish further information, I shall be glad to furnish it.

Yours truly,

Booker T. Washington, Principal.

The next mail brought back the following reply: “I will be very glad to
pay the bills for the library building as they are incurred, to the
extent of twenty thousand dollars, and I am glad of this opportunity to
show the interest I have in your noble work.”

I have found that strict business methods go a long way in securing the
interest of rich people. It has been my constant aim at Tuskegee to
carry out, in our financial and other operations, such business methods
as would be approved of by any New York banking house.

I have spoken of several large gifts to the school; but by far the
greater proportion of the money that has built up the institution has
come in the form of small donations from persons of moderate means. It
is upon these small gifts, which carry with them the interest of
hundreds of donors, that any philanthropic work must depend largely for
its support. In my efforts to get money I have often been surprised at
the patience and deep interest of the ministers, who are besieged on
every hand and at all hours of the day for help. If no other
consideration had convinced me of the value of the Christian life, the
Christlike work which the Church of all denominations in America has
done during the last thirty-five years for the elevation of the black
man would have made me a Christian. In a large degree it has been the
pennies, the nickels, and the dimes which have come from the
Sunday-schools, the Christian Endeavour societies, and the missionary
societies, as well as from the church proper, that have helped to
elevate the Negro at so rapid a rate.

This speaking of small gifts reminds me to say that very few Tuskegee
graduates fail to send us an annual contribution. These contributions
range from twenty-five cents up to ten dollars.

Soon after beginning our third year’s work we were surprised to receive
money from three special sources, and up to the present time we have
continued to receive help from them. First, the State Legislature of
Alabama increased its annual appropriation from two thousand dollars to
three thousand dollars; I might add that still later it increased this
sum to four thousand five hundred dollars a year. The effort to secure
this increase was led by the Hon. M.F. Foster, the member of the
Legislature from Tuskegee. Second, we received one thousand dollars
from the John F. Slater Fund. Our work seemed to please the trustees of
this fund, as they soon began increasing their annual grant. This has
been added to from time to time until at present we receive eleven
thousand dollars annually from the Fund. The other help to which I have
referred came in the shape of an allowance from the Peabody Fund. This
was at first five hundred dollars, but it has since been increased to
fifteen hundred dollars.

The effort to secure help from the Slater and Peabody Funds brought me
into contact with two rare men—men who have had much to do in shaping
the policy for the education of the Negro. I refer to the Hon. J.L.M.
Curry, of Washington, who is the general agent for these two funds, and
Mr. Morris K. Jessup, of New York. Dr. Curry is a native of the South,
an ex-Confederate soldier, yet I do not believe there is any man in the
country who is more deeply interested in the highest welfare of the
Negro than Dr. Curry, or one who is more free from race prejudice. He
enjoys the unique distinction of possessing to an equal degree the
confidence of the black man and the Southern white man. I shall never
forget the first time I met him. It was in Richmond, Va., where he was
then living. I had heard much about him. When I first went into his
presence, trembling because of my youth and inexperience, he took me by
the hand so cordially, and spoke such encouraging words, and gave me
such helpful advice regarding the proper course to pursue, that I came
to know him then, as I have known him ever since, as a high example of
one who is constantly and unselfishly at work for the betterment of
humanity.

Mr. Morris K. Jessup, the treasurer of the Slater Fund, I refer to
because I know of no man of wealth and large and complicated business
responsibilities who gives not only money but his time and thought to
the subject of the proper method of elevating the Negro to the extent
that is true of Mr. Jessup. It is very largely through this effort and
influence that during the last few years the subject of industrial
education has assumed the importance that it has, and been placed on
its present footing.