Chapter XIII.

Two Thousand Miles For A Five-Minute Speech


Soon after the opening of our boarding department, quite a number of
students who evidently were worthy, but who were so poor that they did
not have any money to pay even the small charges at the school, began
applying for admission. This class was composed of both men and women.
It was a great trial to refuse admission to these applicants, and in
1884 we established a night-school to accommodate a few of them.

The night-school was organized on a plan similar to the one which I had
helped to establish at Hampton. At first it was composed of about a
dozen students. They were admitted to the night-school only when they
had no money with which to pay any part of their board in the regular
day-school. It was further required that they must work for ten hours
during the day at some trade or industry, and study academic branches
for two hours during the evening. This was the requirement for the
first one or two years of their stay. They were to be paid something
above the cost of their board, with the understanding that all of their
earnings, except a very small part, were to be reserved in the school’s
treasury, to be used for paying their board in the regular day-school
after they had entered that department. The night-school, started in
this manner, has grown until there are at present four hundred and
fifty-seven students enrolled in it alone.

There could hardly be a more severe test of a student’s worth than this
branch of the Institute’s work. It is largely because it furnishes such
a good opportunity to test the backbone of a student that I place such
high value upon our night-school. Any one who is willing to work ten
hours a day at the brick-yard, or in the laundry, through one or two
years, in order that he or she may have the privilege of studying
academic branches for two hours in the evening, has enough bottom to
warrant being further educated.

After the student has left the night-school he enters the day-school,
where he takes academic branches four days in a week, and works at his
trade two days. Besides this he usually works at his trade during the
three summer months. As a rule, after a student has succeeded in going
through the night-school test, he finds a way to finish the regular
course in industrial and academic training. No student, no matter how
much money he may be able to command, is permitted to go through school
without doing manual labour. In fact, the industrial work is now as
popular as the academic branches. Some of the most successful men and
women who have graduated from the institution obtained their start in
the night-school.

While a great deal of stress is laid upon the industrial side of the
work at Tuskegee, we do not neglect or overlook in any degree the
religious and spiritual side. The school is strictly undenominational,
but it is thoroughly Christian, and the spiritual training of the
students is not neglected. Our preaching service, prayer-meetings,
Sunday-school, Christian Endeavour Society, Young Men’s Christian
Association, and various missionary organizations, testify to this.

In 1885, Miss Olivia Davidson, to whom I have already referred as being
largely responsible for the success of the school during its early
history, and I were married. During our married life she continued to
divide her time and strength between our home and the work for the
school. She not only continued to work in the school at Tuskegee, but
also kept up her habit of going North to secure funds. In 1889 she
died, after four years of happy married life and eight years of hard
and happy work for the school. She literally wore herself out in her
never ceasing efforts in behalf of the work that she so dearly loved.
During our married life there were born to us two bright, beautiful
boys, Booker Taliaferro and Ernest Davidson. The older of these,
Booker, has already mastered the brick-maker’s trade at Tuskegee.

I have often been asked how I began the practice of public speaking. In
answer I would say that I never planned to give any large part of my
life to speaking in public. I have always had more of an ambition to
_do_ things than merely to talk _about_ doing them. It seems that when
I went North with General Armstrong to speak at the series of public
meetings to which I have referred, the President of the National
Educational Association, the Hon. Thomas W. Bicknell, was present at
one of those meetings and heard me speak. A few days afterward he sent
me an invitation to deliver an address at the next meeting of the
Educational Association. This meeting was to be held in Madison, Wis. I
accepted the invitation. This was, in a sense, the beginning of my
public-speaking career.

On the evening that I spoke before the Association there must have been
not far from four thousand persons present. Without my knowing it,
there were a large number of people present from Alabama, and some from
the town of Tuskegee. These white people afterward frankly told me that
they went to this meeting expecting to hear the South roundly abused,
but were pleasantly surprised to find that there was no word of abuse
in my address. On the contrary, the South was given credit for all the
praiseworthy things that it had done. A white lady who was teacher in a
college in Tuskegee wrote back to the local paper that she was
gratified, as well as surprised, to note the credit which I gave the
white people of Tuskegee for their help in getting the school started.
This address at Madison was the first that I had delivered that in any
large measure dealt with the general problem of the races. Those who
heard it seemed to be pleased with what I said and with the general
position that I took.

When I first came to Tuskegee, I determined that I would make it my
home, that I would take as much pride in the right actions of the
people of the town as any white man could do, and that I would, at the
same time, deplore the wrong-doing of the people as much as any white
man. I determined never to say anything in a public address in the
North that I would not be willing to say in the South. I early learned
that it is a hard matter to convert an individual by abusing him, and
that this is more often accomplished by giving credit for all the
praiseworthy actions performed than by calling attention alone to all
the evil done.

While pursuing this policy I have not failed, at the proper time and in
the proper manner, to call attention, in no uncertain terms, to the
wrongs which any part of the South has been guilty of. I have found
that there is a large element in the South that is quick to respond to
straightforward, honest criticism of any wrong policy. As a rule, the
place to criticise the South, when criticism is necessary, is in the
South—not in Boston. A Boston man who came to Alabama to criticise
Boston would not effect so much good, I think, as one who had his word
of criticism to say in Boston.

In this address at Madison I took the ground that the policy to be
pursued with references to the races was, by every honourable means, to
bring them together and to encourage the cultivation of friendly
relations, instead of doing that which would embitter. I further
contended that, in relation to his vote, the Negro should more and more
consider the interests of the community in which he lived, rather than
seek alone to please some one who lived a thousand miles away from him
and from his interests.

In this address I said that the whole future of the Negro rested
largely upon the question as to whether or not he should make himself,
through his skill, intelligence, and character, of such undeniable
value to the community in which he lived that the community could not
dispense with his presence. I said that any individual who learned to
do something better than anybody else—learned to do a common thing in
an uncommon manner—had solved his problem, regardless of the colour of
his skin, and that in proportion as the Negro learned to produce what
other people wanted and must have, in the same proportion would he be
respected.

I spoke of an instance where one of our graduates had produced two
hundred and sixty-six bushels of sweet potatoes from an acre of ground,
in a community where the average production had been only forty-nine
bushels to the acre. He had been able to do this by reason of his
knowledge of the chemistry of the soil and by his knowledge of improved
methods of agriculture. The white farmers in the neighbourhood
respected him, and came to him for ideas regarding the raising of sweet
potatoes. These white farmers honoured and respected him because he, by
his skill and knowledge, had added something to the wealth and the
comfort of the community in which he lived. I explained that my theory
of education for the Negro would not, for example, confine him for all
time to farm life—to the production of the best and the most sweet
potatoes—but that, if he succeeded in this line of industry, he could
lay the foundations upon which his children and grand-children could
grow to higher and more important things in life.

Such, in brief, were some of the views I advocated in this first
address dealing with the broad question of the relations of the two
races, and since that time I have not found any reason for changing my
views on any important point.

In my early life I used to cherish a feeling of ill will toward any one
who spoke in bitter terms against the Negro, or who advocated measures
that tended to oppress the black man or take from him opportunities for
growth in the most complete manner. Now, whenever I hear any one
advocating measures that are meant to curtail the development of
another, I pity the individual who would do this. I know that the one
who makes this mistake does so because of his own lack of opportunity
for the highest kind of growth. I pity him because I know that he is
trying to stop the progress of the world, and because I know that in
time the development and the ceaseless advance of humanity will make
him ashamed of his weak and narrow position. One might as well try to
stop the progress of a mighty railroad train by throwing his body
across the track, as to try to stop the growth of the world in the
direction of giving mankind more intelligence, more culture, more
skill, more liberty, and in the direction of extending more sympathy
and more brotherly kindness.

The address which I delivered at Madison, before the National
Educational Association, gave me a rather wide introduction in the
North, and soon after that opportunities began offering themselves for
me to address audiences there.

I was anxious, however, that the way might also be opened for me to
speak directly to a representative Southern white audience. A partial
opportunity of this kind, one that seemed to me might serve as an
entering wedge, presented itself in 1893, when the international
meeting of Christian Workers was held at Atlanta, Ga. When this
invitation came to me, I had engagements in Boston that seemed to make
it impossible for me to speak in Atlanta. Still, after looking over my
list of dates and places carefully, I found that I could take a train
from Boston that would get me into Atlanta about thirty minutes before
my address was to be delivered, and that I could remain in that city
before taking another train for Boston. My invitation to speak in
Atlanta stipulated that I was to confine my address to five minutes.
The question, then, was whether or not I could put enough into a
five-minute address to make it worth while for me to make such a trip.

I knew that the audience would be largely composed of the most
influential class of white men and women, and that it would be a rare
opportunity for me to let them know what we were trying to do at
Tuskegee, as well as to speak to them about the relations of the races.
So I decided to make the trip. I spoke for five minutes to an audience
of two thousand people, composed mostly of Southern and Northern
whites. What I said seemed to be received with favour and enthusiasm.
The Atlanta papers of the next day commented in friendly terms on my
address, and a good deal was said about it in different parts of the
country. I felt that I had in some degree accomplished my object—that
of getting a hearing from the dominant class of the South.

The demands made upon me for public addresses continued to increase,
coming in about equal numbers from my own people and from Northern
whites. I gave as much time to these addresses as I could spare from
the immediate work at Tuskegee. Most of the addresses in the North were
made for the direct purpose of getting funds with which to support the
school. Those delivered before the coloured people had for their main
object the impressing upon them the importance of industrial and
technical education in addition to academic and religious training.

I now come to that one of the incidents in my life which seems to have
excited the greatest amount of interest, and which perhaps went further
than anything else in giving me a reputation that in a sense might be
called National. I refer to the address which I delivered at the
opening of the Atlanta Cotton states and International Exposition, at
Atlanta, Ga., September 18, 1895.

So much has been said and written about this incident, and so many
questions have been asked me concerning the address, that perhaps I may
be excused for taking up the matter with some detail. The five-minute
address in Atlanta, which I came from Boston to deliver, was possibly
the prime cause for an opportunity being given me to make the second
address there. In the spring of 1895 I received a telegram from
prominent citizens in Atlanta asking me to accompany a committee from
that city to Washington for the purpose of appearing before a committee
of Congress in the interest of securing Government help for the
Exposition. The committee was composed of about twenty-five of the most
prominent and most influential white men of Georgia. All the members of
this committee were white men except Bishop Grant, Bishop Gaines, and
myself. The Mayor and several other city and state officials spoke
before the committee. They were followed by the two coloured bishops.
My name was the last on the list of speakers. I had never before
appeared before such a committee, nor had I ever delivered any address
in the capital of the Nation. I had many misgivings as to what I ought
to say, and as to the impression that my address would make. While I
cannot recall in detail what I said, I remember that I tried to impress
upon the committee, with all the earnestness and plainness of any
language that I could command, that if Congress wanted to do something
which would assist in ridding the South of the race question and making
friends between the two races, it should, in every proper way,
encourage the material and intellectual growth of both races. I said
that the Atlanta Exposition would present an opportunity for both races
to show what advance they had made since freedom, and would at the same
time afford encouragement to them to make still greater progress.

I tried to emphasize the fact that while the Negro should not be
deprived by unfair means of the franchise, political agitation alone
would not save him, and that back of the ballot he must have property,
industry, skill, economy, intelligence, and character, and that no race
without these elements could permanently succeed. I said that in
granting the appropriation Congress could do something that would prove
to be of real and lasting value to both races, and that it was the
first great opportunity of the kind that had been presented since the
close of the Civil War.

I spoke for fifteen or twenty minutes, and was surprised at the close
of my address to receive the hearty congratulations of the Georgia
committee and of the members of Congress who were present. The
Committee was unanimous in making a favourable report, and in a few
days the bill passed Congress. With the passing of this bill the
success of the Atlanta Exposition was assured.

Soon after this trip to Washington the directors of the Exposition
decided that it would be a fitting recognition of the coloured race to
erect a large and attractive building which should be devoted wholly to
showing the progress of the Negro since freedom. It was further decided
to have the building designed and erected wholly by Negro mechanics.
This plan was carried out. In design, beauty, and general finish the
Negro Building was equal to the others on the grounds.

After it was decided to have a separate Negro exhibit, the question
arose as to who should take care of it. The officials of the Exposition
were anxious that I should assume this responsibility, but I declined
to do so, on the plea that the work at Tuskegee at that time demanded
my time and strength. Largely at my suggestion, Mr. I. Garland Penn, of
Lynchburg, Va., was selected to be at the head of the Negro department.
I gave him all the aid that I could. The Negro exhibit, as a whole, was
large and creditable. The two exhibits in this department which
attracted the greatest amount of attention were those from the Hampton
Institute and the Tuskegee Institute. The people who seemed to be the
most surprised, as well as pleased, at what they saw in the Negro
Building were the Southern white people.

As the day for the opening of the Exposition drew near, the Board of
Directors began preparing the programme for the opening exercises. In
the discussion from day to day of the various features of this
programme, the question came up as to the advisability of putting a
member of the Negro race on for one of the opening addresses, since the
Negroes had been asked to take such a prominent part in the Exposition.
It was argued, further, that such recognition would mark the good
feeling prevailing between the two races. Of course there were those
who were opposed to any such recognition of the rights of the Negro,
but the Board of Directors, composed of men who represented the best
and most progressive element in the South, had their way, and voted to
invite a black man to speak on the opening day. The next thing was to
decide upon the person who was thus to represent the Negro race. After
the question had been canvassed for several days, the directors voted
unanimously to ask me to deliver one of the opening-day addresses, and
in a few days after that I received the official invitation.

The receiving of this invitation brought to me a sense of
responsibility that it would be hard for any one not placed in my
position to appreciate. What were my feelings when this invitation came
to me? I remembered that I had been a slave; that my early years had
been spent in the lowest depths of poverty and ignorance, and that I
had had little opportunity to prepare me for such a responsibility as
this. It was only a few years before that time that any white man in
the audience might have claimed me as his slave; and it was easily
possible that some of my former owners might be present to hear me
speak.

I knew, too, that this was the first time in the entire history of the
Negro that a member of my race had been asked to speak from the same
platform with white Southern men and women on any important National
occasion. I was asked now to speak to an audience composed of the
wealth and culture of the white South, the representatives of my former
masters. I knew, too, that while the greater part of my audience would
be composed of Southern people, yet there would be present a large
number of Northern whites, as well as a great many men and women of my
own race.

I was determined to say nothing that I did not feel from the bottom of
my heart to be true and right. When the invitation came to me, there
was not one word of intimation as to what I should say or as to what I
should omit. In this I felt that the Board of Directors had paid a
tribute to me. They knew that by one sentence I could have blasted, in
a large degree, the success of the Exposition. I was also painfully
conscious of the fact that, while I must be true to my own race in my
utterances, I had it in my power to make such an ill-timed address as
would result in preventing any similar invitation being extended to a
black man again for years to come. I was equally determined to be true
to the North, as well as to the best element of the white South, in
what I had to say.

The papers, North and South, had taken up the discussion of my coming
speech, and as the time for it drew near this discussion became more
and more widespread. Not a few of the Southern white papers were
unfriendly to the idea of my speaking. From my own race I received many
suggestions as to what I ought to say. I prepared myself as best I
could for the address, but as the eighteenth of September drew nearer,
the heavier my heart became, and the more I feared that my effort would
prove a failure and a disappointment.

The invitation had come at a time when I was very busy with my school
work, as it was the beginning of our school year. After preparing my
address, I went through it, as I usually do with those utterances which
I consider particularly important, with Mrs. Washington, and she
approved of what I intended to say. On the sixteenth of September, the
day before I was to start for Atlanta, so many of the Tuskegee teachers
expressed a desire to hear my address that I consented to read it to
them in a body. When I had done so, and had heard their criticisms and
comments, I felt somewhat relieved, since they seemed to think well of
what I had to say.

On the morning of September 17, together with Mrs. Washington and my
three children, I started for Atlanta. I felt a good deal as I suppose
a man feels when he is on his way to the gallows. In passing through
the town of Tuskegee I met a white farmer who lived some distance out
in the country. In a jesting manner this man said: “Washington, you
have spoken before the Northern white people, the Negroes in the South,
and to us country white people in the South; but Atlanta, to-morrow,
you will have before you the Northern whites, the Southern whites, and
the Negroes all together. I am afraid that you have got yourself in a
tight place.” This farmer diagnosed the situation correctly, but his
frank words did not add anything to my comfort.

In the course of the journey from Tuskegee to Atlanta both coloured and
white people came to the train to point me out, and discussed with
perfect freedom, in my hearings, what was going to take place the next
day. We were met by a committee in Atlanta. Almost the first thing that
I heard when I got off the train in that city was an expression
something like this, from an old coloured man near by: “Dat’s de man of
my race what’s gwine to make a speech at de Exposition to-morrow. I’se
sho’ gwine to hear him.”

Atlanta was literally packed, at the time, with people from all parts
of the country, and with representatives of foreign governments, as
well as with military and civic organizations. The afternoon papers had
forecasts of the next day’s proceedings in flaring headlines. All this
tended to add to my burden. I did not sleep much that night. The next
morning, before day, I went carefully over what I planned to say. I
also kneeled down and asked God’s blessing upon my effort. Right here,
perhaps, I ought to add that I make it a rule never to go before an
audience, on any occasion, without asking the blessing of God upon what
I want to say.

I always make it a rule to make especial preparation for each separate
address. No two audiences are exactly alike. It is my aim to reach and
talk to the heart of each individual audience, taking it into my
confidence very much as I would a person. When I am speaking to an
audience, I care little for how what I am saying is going to sound in
the newspapers, or to another audience, or to an individual. At the
time, the audience before me absorbs all my sympathy, thought, and
energy.

Early in the morning a committee called to escort me to my place in the
procession which was to march to the Exposition grounds. In this
procession were prominent coloured citizens in carriages, as well as
several Negro military organizations. I noted that the Exposition
officials seemed to go out of their way to see that all of the coloured
people in the procession were properly placed and properly treated. The
procession was about three hours in reaching the Exposition grounds,
and during all of this time the sun was shining down upon us
disagreeably hot. When we reached the grounds, the heat, together with
my nervous anxiety, made me feel as if I were about ready to collapse,
and to feel that my address was not going to be a success. When I
entered the audience-room, I found it packed with humanity from bottom
to top, and there were thousands outside who could not get in.

The room was very large, and well suited to public speaking. When I
entered the room, there were vigorous cheers from the coloured portion
of the audience, and faint cheers from some of the white people. I had
been told, while I had been in Atlanta, that while many white people
were going to be present to hear me speak, simply out of curiosity, and
that others who would be present would be in full sympathy with me,
there was a still larger element of the audience which would consist of
those who were going to be present for the purpose of hearing me make a
fool of myself, or, at least, of hearing me say some foolish thing so
that they could say to the officials who had invited me to speak, “I
told you so!”

One of the trustees of the Tuskegee Institute, as well as my personal
friend, Mr. William H. Baldwin, Jr. was at the time General Manager of
the Southern Railroad, and happened to be in Atlanta on that day. He
was so nervous about the kind of reception that I would have, and the
effect that my speech would produce, that he could not persuade himself
to go into the building, but walked back and forth in the grounds
outside until the opening exercises were over.