Chapter IX.

Anxious Days And Sleepless Nights


The coming of Christmas, that first year of our residence in Alabama,
gave us an opportunity to get a farther insight into the real life of
the people. The first thing that reminded us that Christmas had arrived
was the “foreday” visits of scores of children rapping at our doors,
asking for “Chris’mus gifts! Chris’mus gifts!” Between the hours of two
o’clock and five o’clock in the morning I presume that we must have had
a half-hundred such calls. This custom prevails throughout this portion
of the South to-day.

During the days of slavery it was a custom quite generally observed
throughout all the Southern states to give the coloured people a week
of holiday at Christmas, or to allow the holiday to continue as long as
the “yule log” lasted. The male members of the race, and often the
female members, were expected to get drunk. We found that for a whole
week the coloured people in and around Tuskegee dropped work the day
before Christmas, and that it was difficult for any one to perform any
service from the time they stopped work until after the New Year.
Persons who at other times did not use strong drink thought it quite
the proper thing to indulge in it rather freely during the Christmas
week. There was a widespread hilarity, and a free use of guns, pistols,
and gunpowder generally. The sacredness of the season seemed to have
been almost wholly lost sight of.

During this first Christmas vacation I went some distance from the town
to visit the people on one of the large plantations. In their poverty
and ignorance it was pathetic to see their attempts to get joy out of
the season that in most parts of the country is so sacred and so dear
to the heart. In one cabin I notice that all that the five children had
to remind them of the coming of Christ was a single bunch of
firecrackers, which they had divided among them. In another cabin,
where there were at least a half-dozen persons, they had only ten
cents’ worth of ginger-cakes, which had been bought in the store the
day before. In another family they had only a few pieces of sugarcane.
In still another cabin I found nothing but a new jug of cheap, mean
whiskey, which the husband and wife were making free use of,
notwithstanding the fact that the husband was one of the local
ministers. In a few instances I found that the people had gotten hold
of some bright-coloured cards that had been designed for advertising
purposes, and were making the most of these. In other homes some member
of the family had bought a new pistol. In the majority of cases there
was nothing to be seen in the cabin to remind one of the coming of the
Saviour, except that the people had ceased work in the fields and were
lounging about their homes. At night, during Christmas week, they
usually had what they called a “frolic,” in some cabin on the
plantation. That meant a kind of rough dance, where there was likely to
be a good deal of whiskey used, and where there might be some shooting
or cutting with razors.

While I was making this Christmas visit I met an old coloured man who
was one of the numerous local preachers, who tried to convince me, from
the experience Adam had in the Garden of Eden, that God had cursed all
labour, and that, therefore, it was a sin for any man to work. For that
reason this man sought to do as little work as possible. He seemed at
that time to be supremely happy, because he was living, as he expressed
it, through one week that was free from sin.

In the school we made a special effort to teach our students the
meaning of Christmas, and to give them lessons in its proper
observance. In this we have been successful to a degree that makes me
feel safe in saying that the season now has a new meaning, not only
through all that immediate region, but, in a measure, wherever our
graduates have gone.

At the present time one of the most satisfactory features of the
Christmas and Thanksgiving season at Tuskegee is the unselfish and
beautiful way in which our graduates and students spend their time in
administering to the comfort and happiness of others, especially the
unfortunate. Not long ago some of our young men spent a holiday in
rebuilding a cabin for a helpless coloured women who was about
seventy-five years old. At another time I remember that I made it known
in chapel, one night, that a very poor student was suffering from cold,
because he needed a coat. The next morning two coats were sent to my
office for him.

I have referred to the disposition on the part of the white people in
the town of Tuskegee and vicinity to help the school. From the first, I
resolved to make the school a real part of the community in which it
was located. I was determined that no one should have the feeling that
it was a foreign institution, dropped down in the midst of the people,
for which they had no responsibility and in which they had no interest.
I noticed that the very fact that they had been asking to contribute
toward the purchase of the land made them begin to feel as if it was
going to be their school, to a large degree. I noted that just in
proportion as we made the white people feel that the institution was a
part of the life of the community, and that, while we wanted to make
friends in Boston, for example, we also wanted to make white friends in
Tuskegee, and that we wanted to make the school of real service to all
the people, their attitude toward the school became favourable.

Perhaps I might add right here, what I hope to demonstrate later, that,
so far as I know, the Tuskegee school at the present time has no warmer
and more enthusiastic friends anywhere than it has among the white
citizens of Tuskegee and throughout the state of Alabama and the entire
South. From the first, I have advised our people in the South to make
friends in every straightforward, manly way with their next-door
neighbour, whether he be a black man or a white man. I have also
advised them, where no principle is at stake, to consult the interests
of their local communities, and to advise with their friends in regard
to their voting.

For several months the work of securing the money with which to pay for
the farm went on without ceasing. At the end of three months enough was
secured to repay the loan of two hundred and fifty dollars to General
Marshall, and within two months more we had secured the entire five
hundred dollars and had received a deed of the one hundred acres of
land. This gave us a great deal of satisfaction. It was not only a
source of satisfaction to secure a permanent location for the school,
but it was equally satisfactory to know that the greater part of the
money with which it was paid for had been gotten from the white and
coloured people in the town of Tuskegee. The most of this money was
obtained by holding festivals and concerts, and from small individual
donations.

Our next effort was in the direction of increasing the cultivation of
the land, so as to secure some return from it, and at the same time
give the students training in agriculture. All the industries at
Tuskegee have been started in natural and logical order, growing out of
the needs of a community settlement. We began with farming, because we
wanted something to eat.

Many of the students, also, were able to remain in school but a few
weeks at a time, because they had so little money with which to pay
their board. Thus another object which made it desirable to get an
industrial system started was in order to make it available as a means
of helping the students to earn money enough so that they might be able
to remain in school during the nine months’ session of the school year.

The first animal that the school came into possession of was an old
blind horse given us by one of the white citizens of Tuskegee. Perhaps
I may add here that at the present time the school owns over two
hundred horses, colts, mules, cows, calves, and oxen, and about seven
hundred hogs and pigs, as well as a large number of sheep and goats.

The school was constantly growing in numbers, so much so that, after we
had got the farm paid for, the cultivation of the land begun, and the
old cabins which we had found on the place somewhat repaired, we turned
our attention toward providing a large, substantial building. After
having given a good deal of thought to the subject, we finally had the
plans drawn for a building that was estimated to cost about six
thousand dollars. This seemed to us a tremendous sum, but we knew that
the school must go backward or forward, and that our work would mean
little unless we could get hold of the students in their home life.

One incident which occurred about this time gave me a great deal of
satisfaction as well as surprise. When it became known in the town that
we were discussing the plans for a new, large building, a Southern
white man who was operating a sawmill not far from Tuskegee came to me
and said that he would gladly put all the lumber necessary to erect the
building on the grounds, with no other guarantee for payment than my
word that it would be paid for when we secured some money. I told the
man frankly that at the time we did not have in our hands one dollar of
the money needed. Notwithstanding this, he insisted on being allowed to
put the lumber on the grounds. After we had secured some portion of the
money we permitted him to do this.

Miss Davidson again began the work of securing in various ways small
contributions for the new building from the white and coloured people
in and near Tuskegee. I think I never saw a community of people so
happy over anything as were the coloured people over the prospect of
this new building. One day, when we were holding a meeting to secure
funds for its erection, an old, ante-bellum coloured man came a
distance of twelve miles and brought in his ox-cart a large hog. When
the meeting was in progress, he rose in the midst of the company and
said that he had no money which he could give, but he had raised two
fine hogs, and that he had brought one of them as a contribution toward
the expenses of the building. He closed his announcement by saying:
“Any nigger that’s got any love for his race, or any respect for
himself, will bring a hog to the next meeting.” Quite a number of men
in the community also volunteered to give several days’ work, each,
toward the erection of the building.

After we had secured all the help that we could in Tuskegee, Miss
Davidson decided to go North for the purpose of securing additional
funds. For weeks she visited individuals and spoke in churches and
before Sunday schools and other organizations. She found this work
quite trying, and often embarrassing. The school was not known, but she
was not long in winning her way into the confidence of the best people
in the North.

The first gift from any Northern person was received from a New York
lady whom Miss Davidson met on the boat that was bringing her North.
They fell into a conversation, and the Northern lady became so much
interested in the effort being made at Tuskegee that before they parted
Miss Davidson was handed a check for fifty dollars. For some time
before our marriage, and also after it, Miss Davidson kept up the work
of securing money in the North and in the South by interesting people
by personal visits and through correspondence. At the same time she
kept in close touch with the work at Tuskegee, as lady principal and
classroom teacher. In addition to this, she worked among the older
people in and near Tuskegee, and taught a Sunday school class in the
town. She was never very strong, but never seemed happy unless she was
giving all of her strength to the cause which she loved. Often, at
night, after spending the day in going from door to door trying to
interest persons in the work at Tuskegee, she would be so exhausted
that she could not undress herself. A lady upon whom she called, in
Boston, afterward told me that at one time when Miss Davidson called
her to see and send up her card the lady was detained a little before
she could see Miss Davidson, and when she entered the parlour she found
Miss Davidson so exhausted that she had fallen asleep.

While putting up our first building, which was named Porter Hall, after
Mr. A.H. Porter, of Brooklyn, N.Y., who gave a generous sum toward its
erection, the need for money became acute. I had given one of our
creditors a promise that upon a certain day he should be paid four
hundred dollars. On the morning of that day we did not have a dollar.
The mail arrived at the school at ten o’clock, and in this mail there
was a check sent by Miss Davidson for exactly four hundred dollars. I
could relate many instances of almost the same character. This four
hundred dollars was given by two ladies in Boston. Two years later,
when the work at Tuskegee had grown considerably, and when we were in
the midst of a season when we were so much in need of money that the
future looked doubtful and gloomy, the same two Boston ladies sent us
six thousand dollars. Words cannot describe our surprise, or the
encouragement that the gift brought to us. Perhaps I might add here
that for fourteen years these same friends have sent us six thousand
dollars a year.

As soon as the plans were drawn for the new building, the students
began digging out the earth where the foundations were to be laid,
working after the regular classes were over. They had not fully
outgrown the idea that it was hardly the proper thing for them to use
their hands, since they had come there, as one of them expressed it,
“to be educated, and not to work.” Gradually, though, I noted with
satisfaction that a sentiment in favour of work was gaining ground.
After a few weeks of hard work the foundations were ready, and a day
was appointed for the laying of the corner-stone.

When it is considered that the laying of this corner-stone took place
in the heart of the South, in the “Black Belt,” in the centre of that
part of our country that was most devoted to slavery; that at that time
slavery had been abolished only about sixteen years; that only sixteen
years before no Negro could be taught from books without the teacher
receiving the condemnation of the law or of public sentiment—when all
this is considered, the scene that was witnessed on that spring day at
Tuskegee was a remarkable one. I believe there are few places in the
world where it could have taken place.

The principal address was delivered by the Hon. Waddy Thompson, the
Superintendent of Education for the county. About the corner-stone were
gathered the teachers, the students, their parents and friends, the
county officials—who were white—and all the leading white men in that
vicinity, together with many of the black men and women whom the same
white people but a few years before had held a title to as property.
The members of both races were anxious to exercise the privilege of
placing under the corner-stone some momento.

Before the building was completed we passed through some very trying
seasons. More than once our hearts were made to bleed, as it were,
because bills were falling due that we did not have the money to meet.
Perhaps no one who has not gone through the experience, month after
month, of trying to erect buildings and provide equipment for a school
when no one knew where the money was to come from, can properly
appreciate the difficulties under which we laboured. During the first
years at Tuskegee I recall that night after night I would roll and toss
on my bed, without sleep, because of the anxiety and uncertainty which
we were in regarding money. I knew that, in a large degree, we were
trying an experiment—that of testing whether or not it was possible for
Negroes to build up and control the affairs of a large education
institution. I knew that if we failed it would injure the whole race. I
knew that the presumption was against us. I knew that in the case of
white people beginning such an enterprise it would be taken for granted
that they were going to succeed, but in our case I felt that people
would be surprised if we succeeded. All this made a burden which
pressed down on us, sometimes, it seemed, at the rate of a thousand
pounds to the square inch.

In all our difficulties and anxieties, however, I never went to a white
or a black person in the town of Tuskegee for any assistance that was
in their power to render, without being helped according to their
means. More than a dozen times, when bills figuring up into the
hundreds of dollars were falling due, I applied to the white men of
Tuskegee for small loans, often borrowing small amounts from as many as
a half-dozen persons, to meet our obligations. One thing I was
determined to do from the first, and that was to keep the credit of the
school high; and this, I think I can say without boasting, we have done
all through these years.

I shall always remember a bit of advice given me by Mr. George W.
Campbell, the white man to whom I have referred to as the one who
induced General Armstrong to send me to Tuskegee. Soon after I entered
upon the work Mr. Campbell said to me, in his fatherly way:
“Washington, always remember that credit is capital.”

At one time when we were in the greatest distress for money that we
ever experienced, I placed the situation frankly before General
Armstrong. Without hesitation he gave me his personal check for all the
money which he had saved for his own use. This was not the only time
that General Armstrong helped Tuskegee in this way. I do not think I
have ever made this fact public before.

During the summer of 1882, at the end of the first year’s work of the
school, I was married to Miss Fannie N. Smith, of Malden, W. Va. We
began keeping house in Tuskegee early in the fall. This made a home for
our teachers, who now had been increased to four in number. My wife was
also a graduate of the Hampton Institute. After earnest and constant
work in the interests of the school, together with her housekeeping
duties, my wife passed away in May, 1884. One child, Portia M.
Washington, was born during our marriage.

From the first, my wife most earnestly devoted her thoughts and time to
the work of the school, and was completely one with me in every
interest and ambition. She passed away, however, before she had an
opportunity of seeing what the school was designed to be.