As nearly as I can trace my history I was about 2 weeks old
when the war closed. My parents were both slaves. Father was killed
shortly after my birth while hauling wood to town on an ox wagon.
I had 3 sisters and one brother. Two sisters and my brother I
know to be dead only as history tells me. Yet I do not doubt it as
they are buried in the family burying ground.
My sister mother and myself were ku klucked, and sold in
Arkansaw and there are now so many conflictinng reports concerning
them I dare not say if they are dead or alive. Mr. Carver the jentleman
who owned my mother sent a man for us, but only I was brought
back, nearly dead with whooping cough with the report that mother
& sister was dead, although some sauy they saw them afterwards
going north with the soldiers.
My home was near Neosho Newton Co Missouri where I
remained until I was about 9 years old my body was very feble
and it was a constant warfare between life and death to see who
would gain the mastery - - - -
From a child I had an inordinate desire for knowledge, and
especially music, painting, flowers, and the sciences Algebra being
one of my favorite studies
Day after day I spent in the woods alone in order to collect
my floral beautis and put them in my little garden I had hidden in
brush not far from the house, as it was considered foolishness in
that neighborhood to waste time on flowers.
And many are the tears I have shed because I would break the
roots or flower of off some of my pets while removing them from the
ground, and strange to say all sorts of vegetation succeed to thrive
under my touch until I was styled the plant doctor, and plants from
all over the country would be brought to me for treatment. At this
time I had never heard of botany and could scerly read.
Rocks had an equal facination for me and many are the basketsful
that I have been compelled to remove from the outside chimney corner
of that old log house, with the injunction to throw them down hill.
I obeyed but picked up the choicest ones and hid them in another
place, and some how that same chimney corner would, in a few days,
or weeks be running over gain to suffer the same fate I have some of 
the specimens in my collection now and consider them the choicest
of the lot. Mr. and Mrs. Carver were very kind to me and I thank
them so much for my home training. They encouraged me to secure
knowledge helping me all they could, but this was quite limited. As
we lived in the country no colored schools were available so I was
permitted to go 8 miles to a school at town (Neosho). This simply
sharpened my apetite for more knowledge. I managed to secure all
of my meager wardrobe from home and when they heard from me
I was cooking for a wealthy family in Ft Scott Kans. for my board,
cloths and school privileges.
Of course they were indignant and sent for me to come home
at once, to die, as the family doctor had told them I would never live
to see 21 years of age. I trusted to God and pressed on (I had been
a Christian since about 8 years old.) Sunschine and shadow were
profusely intermingled such as naturally befall a defenceless orphan
by those who wish to prey upon them
My health began improving and I remained here for two years,
From here to Olutha Kans. to school, From there to Paola Normal
School, from there to Minneapolis Kans. where I remained in school
about 7 years finishing the high school, and in addition some Latin
and Greek. From here to Kans. City entered a business college of
short hand and type-writing. I was here to have a position in the
Union telegraph Office as stenographer & typewriter, but the thirst
for knowledge gained the mastery and I sought to enter Highland
College at Highland Kans. was refused on account of my color.
I went from here to the Western part of Kans. where I saw
the subject of my famous Yucca & cactus painting that went to the
Worlds Fair. I drifted from here to Winterset Iowa, began as head
cook in a large hotel. Many thanks here for the acquaintance of Mr.
and Mrs. Dr. Milholland, who insisted upon me going to an Art
School, and choose Simpson College for me.
The opening of school found me at Simpson attempting to run
a laundry for my support and batching to economize. For quite one
month I lived on prayer beef suet and corn meal. Modesty prevented
me telling my condition to strangers.
The news soon spread that I did laundry work and realy needed
it, so from that time on favors not only rained but poured upon me.
I cannot speak too highly of the faculty, students and in fact the
town generaly, they all seemed to take pride in seeing if he or she
might not do more for me than some one else.
But I wish to especially mention the names of Miss Etta M.
Budd (my art teacher Mrs. W. A. Liston & family, and Rev. A. D. 
Field & family. Aside from their substantial help at Simpson, were
the means of my attendance at Ames.
Please fix this to suit)
I think you know my career at Ames and will fix it better than
I. I will simply mention a few things
I received the prize offered for the best herbarium in cryptogamy.
I would like to have said more about you Mrs. Liston and Miss Budd
but I feared you would not put it in about yourself, and I did not
want one without all.
I received a letter from Mrs. Liston and she gave me an idea
that it was not to be a book or anything of the kind this is only a
fragmentary list. I knit Chrochet, and made all my hose mittens etc.
while I was in school.
If this is not sufficient please let me know, and if it ever comes
out in print I would like to see it.
God bless you all. 

I was born in Diamond Grove, Mo., about the close of the great
Civil War, in a little one-roomed log shanty, on the home of Mr.
Moses Carver, a German by birth and the owner of my mother, my
father being the property of Mr. Grant, who owned the adjoining
plantation. I am told that my father was killed while hauling wood
with an ox team. In some way he fell from the load, under the
wagon, both wheels passing over him.
At the close of the war the Ku Klux Klan was at its height
in that section of Missouri. My mother was stolen with myself, a
wee babe in her arms. My brother James was grabbed and spirited
away to the woods by Mr. Carver. He tried to get me, but could
not. They carried my mother and myself down into Arkansas, and
sold my mother. At that time I was nearly dead with the whooping
cough that I had caught on the way. I was so very frail and sick
that they thought of course that I would die within a few days. Mr.
Carver immediately sent a very fine race horse and some money
to purchase us back. The man (Bently by name) returned with the
money and myself, having given the horse for me. The horse was
valued at $300. Every effort was made to find my mother, but to no
avail.
In the meantime my only two sisters died and were buried. My
brother James and I grew up together, sharing each other's sorrows
on the splendid farm owned by Mr. Carver. When just a mere tot
in short dresses my very soul thirsted for an education. I literally
lived in the woods. I wanted to know every strange stone, flower,
insect, bird, or beast. No one could tell me.
My only book was an old Webster's Elementary Spelling Book.
I would seek the answer here without satisfaction. I almost knew
the book by heart. At the age of 19 years my brother left the old
home for Fayetteville, Arkansas. Shortly after, at the age of 10 years,
I left for Neosho, a little town just 8 miles from our farm, where I
could go to school. Mr. and Mrs. Carver were perfectly willing for
us to go where we could be educated the same as white children.
I remained here about two years, got an opportunity to go to Fort
Scott, Kansas with a family. They drove through the country.
Every year I went to school, supporting myself by cooking and
doing all kinds of house work in private families. At the age of
nineteen years I went back to see my brother and Mr. and Mrs.
Carver. I had not improved much in stature, as I rode on a halffare ticket. The conductor thought I was rather small to be traveling
alone. I spent the summer here, and returned to Minneapolis, Kansas 
where I finished my high schGol work. 

The sad news reached me here that James, my only brother,
had died with the small pox. Being conscious as never before that
I was left alone, I trusted God and pushed ahead. In working for
others I had learned the minutia of laundering. I opened a laundry
for myselfi got all I could do.
After finishing high school here I made application to enter a
certain College in Iowa. I was admitted, went but when the President
saw I was colored he would not receive me. I had spent nearly all of
my money, and had to open a laundry here. I was liberally patroned
by the students. I remained here until spring and went to Winterset,
Iowa, as first cook in a large hotel.
One evening I went to a white church, and set in the rear of
the house. The next day a handsome man called for me at the hotel,
and said his wife wanted to see me. When I reached the splendid
residence I was astonished to recognize her as the prima dona in the
choir. I was most astonished when she told me that my fine voice
had attracted her. I had to sing quite a number of pieces for her,
and agree to come to her house at least once a weeki and from that
time till now Mr. and Mrs. Milholland have been my warmest and
most helpful friends.
I cooked at this hotel for some timei then opened a laundry
for myself. I ran this laundry for one year. This same Mr. and Mrs.
Milholland encouraged me to go to college. It was her custom to
have me come at the day and rehearse to her the doings of the day.
She would invariably laugh after such a recital and say, "Whoever
heard of anyone person doing half so many things."
She encouraged me to sing and paint, for which arts I had
passionate fondness. In one years time I had saved sufficient money
to take me to Simpson College, at Indianola, Iowa where I took art,
music and college work. I open a laundry here for my support. After
all my matriculation fees had been paid I had 10 c worth of corn
meal, and the other 5 c I spent for beef suet. I lived on these two
things .one whole week-it took that long for the people to learn that
I wanted clothes to wash. After that week I had many friends and
plenty of work.
I would never allow anyone to give me money, no difference
how badly I needed it. I wanted literally to earn my living. I remained
here for three yearsi then entered the Iowa State College, at Ames,
Iowa, where I pursued my Agricultural work, taking two degrees,
Bachelor and Master.
After finishing my Bachelor's degree I was elected a member 
of the faculty, and given charge of the greenhouse, bacteriological
laboratory, and the laboratory work in systematic botany.
Mr. Washington said he needed a man of my training. I accepted
and came to Tuskegee nearly 27 years ago, and have been here ever
since. 

My dear Mrs. Milhol1and:-
I know you wonder what has become of me. Well your letter
got misplaced in the rush of the opening of school. . . . Your letter
turned up today.
I think if we wait awhile prices will drop to normal and we
will be able to get it for almost 1/3 of the amount in fact I believe
some publishers later will take it on a royalty basis.
If I can be of any service in looking the manuscript over for
you and returning the same with suggestions I will be glad to do so,
but frankly I want you to hold it permanently for should anything
happen to me there would be a great demand for just such data as
you have.
I have kept people here from writing one because I told them
one was already written.
When I pass from earth to my reward there will be a great
demand for such a book, and it will be a source of revenue for you,
possibly in your declining years.
To give it more value I might give to it my endorsement.
I am also wondering if magazines would not pay for certain
popular parts of it as an article that would be of interest to science
or popular reading.
Much Love to all,
Kindly let me know what you think of what I have said.
Sincerely your friend
Geo. W. Carver 

My dear Mrs. Milholland:-
How glad I was to get your card, I have been thinking of you
almost every day for months and since I did not get an answer to
my last letter I concluded you had changed your address. . . .
I wonder if you have seen the little book entitled Handicapped
Winners written by Miss Sara Estelle Haskin, Educational Secy. of
the Board of Missions, Woman's work, M. E. South. It is written for
their Schools, with the hope that it will bring about a better feeling
for the negro.
It is published by their publishing house. I only have one copy
or I would send you one. It has the "Peanut Wizard" in it.
Your name appears in it also. If you have a copy tell me please
what you think of it.
How I wish you were nearer so I could come and see you once
and a while.
My soul thirsts at times to see and have a chat with you.
God is blessing me more and more every day it seems.
I hardly think you would know me now I am quite gray, but
pretty active yet.
Sincerely and greatfully yours,
Geo. W. Carver

My dear Mrs. Milholland:-
How glad I was to get your good letter it seems so refreshing
to hear from you ....
No the book does not even approach yours and I believe God
in some way will provide a way for yours to come out, I am anxious
for you to see this little book because it is to be put into their schools,
for the information of the white boys and girls down here who seem
to know so little about many types of colored people.

Sincerely yours
Geo. W. Carver

My dear Mrs. Milholland:-
I am attempting to answer your good letter with out having it
before me ....
I am reluctantly sending you your most interesting manuscript.
I have ten books with interesting sketches of my life on my desk
now.
Nearly all the authors came and remained on the ground while
writing them.
Yours however covers points they could not get.
I have never permitted anyone to see your manuscript. It is too
unique I feared they would copy from it. Of course now it wants
bringing up to date. From time to time I have tried to find the time
to do it, but it seems impossible, I may be forced to retire before
very long, as I am not very strong and am beginning to feel the
weight of years.
I hope you will keep this manuscript so that I can revise it and
make use of the unpublished facts it contains.
I do not feel so well tonight, so I will close and retire.
Very sincerely yours
G. W. Carver

My dear Mrs. Milholland:-
Thank you so much for your most interesting letter. Well with
the manuscript, I thought you would give out just such information
as you thought best. As I said before, you have facts there that no
one else has, indeed you know of my early struggles as but few
people do, and in other ways you know me as probably no one else
does.
Another book just came to my desk a few days ago, with quite 
an autobiographical sketch.
By and by, before many years your manuscript will be most
valuable as I will have passed on and then writers will be casting
about to write more books, and make them complete. You have much
of my early struggles and boyhood days.
Of course you was tired of it but save those fragments, they
are valuable ....
I am so sincerely yours
G. W. Carver

My esteemed friend, Miss Crisp:
How happy I am to hear from you
I understand why the Saturday Evening Post did not accept
your articles because the magazines have indeed been lavish in what
they have had to say. I have been wondering whether it would be
possible to get this into some foreign magazine, although the Orient
is so torn up that I am not sure that it would have the value that
it ought. I am thinking, however, that you will find an American
publication that will be happy to get it, one that has not carried a
write-up with reference to myself. It might be that some Southern
publication will be glad to get it.
Most sincerely and gratefully yours,
G. W. Carver

My esteemed friend, Miss Crisp:
Thank you so much for your fine letter, the poems, and the
article that you sent me ....
I have read the article entitled "The Man With Answers" and
I believe that if you rewrite this article and cluster it around Henry
Wallace some magazine and papers will handle it. I have received
a number of requests from the political parties sponsoring the
Vice President, wanting me to write an article about our relationships as
they felt that more knowledge should be given out with reference to
Mr. Wallace's attitude toward the Negro and they thought I could do
it better than anyone else. I have refrained from any political writing
of this kind, and as I stated before, I believe your article worked
over would meet a hearty reception.
This article, however, does not appear to me to have the same
spirit of your other writings. I think one reason why the article has
been turned down is due to the fact that in several ways it savors of
the article published by Mr. Childers in the American Magazine, and
while this article contained many good things and struck a popular
chord with a certain type of people, the very careful thinker did not
approve of a number of things that Mr. Childers dwelt upon such as
how I looked, and how I dressed, and that sort of thing. Mr. Powell
and several other white people with whom I talked from down town
didn't like the article for that reason. I had a great many letters with
reference to this article and not one of them mentioned that feature
of it. I did get a few that regretted that he should put in all that.
I really believe that if you leave much of that out and put the
spirit of your real genuine self into it that you will give us something
quite different and find it readily accepted. . . .
Suppose that you try recasting this article and cluster it around
my knowledge of Henry Wallace and our relationship. I am quite sure
that you are thoroughly familiar with Mr. Wallace's attitude toward
me.
I have just received an article about the same length as your's
from President Gross of Simpson College. It is without doubt one of
the most beautiful articles that has ever appeared regarding myself.
He was here and spent several hours, and the article is high class
from every angle and is rather different from any article that has
appeared.
When you are yourself you can do just as well, and indeed you
have a distinct and catchy characteristic in your own writing that no
one else seems to catch. Think it over carefully and see whether I
am right or wrong.
Most sincerely yours,
G. W. Carver 

My dear Mrs. Holt:
I read the manuscript that you sent Mr. Curtis for me, and I
want you to know that it is the most fascinating piece of writing that
I have read. I started in and I confess I could not lay it down until
I had finished it. You certainly have reflected your own personality
into it in a most charming and delightful way, and the facts are really
very clear.
Very sincerely yours,
George W. Carver 

My dear Mrs. Holt:
This is simply to extend you greetings and to say that I hope
you have the sketch of my early life that you wanted. Both Mr.
Curtis and myself did the best we could with it.
I want to thank you also for the most fascinating article that
appeared in the Christian Science Monitor some weeks ago. It is
indeed illuminating and one that you do not want to put down until
it is finished, then you wanted to reread it.
We are looking forward to your coming down before a very
great while . . . .
I hope you will call on us for any additional material that you
need, and it will be forthcoming if it can be gotten together. I have
a book purported to be the only authentic information on the Carver
family. Both Mr. Curtis and myself came upon a very egregious error,
so much so that I am just a little afraid to do much quoting from it.
For instance, it gives the purchase of my mother by Mr. Carver with
her two boys. I have the bill of sale of my mother which shows that
she was just a young girl when she was purchased, and according to
that statement in the book, I would now be much over one hundred
years old.
Most sincerely yours,
G. W. Carver

My esteemed friend, Mrs. Holt:
Thank you so much for your most interesting letter ...
I am happy to know that the book is making progress. I am sure
that it will be unusually rich and fine. I shall be glad to assist you
in filling in those gaps of which you speak. It will be very difficult
indeed as there are so many things that naturally I erased from my
mind. There are some things that an orphan child does not want to
remember, but with such fragments as you have been able to collect,
and Mr. Curtis, and myself, I am sure that we can piece together
something that will not interfere with your high thinking too much.
With every good wish, and with the hope that I will see you
before a great while, I am
Most sincerely yours,
G. W. Carver 

My esteemed friend, Mrs. Holt:
This is to thank you for your letter of recent date which I am
very glad indeed to get. . . .
Your letter is quite refreshing. I am glad that you are able to get
in as much of the manuscript as the printers can use at the present
time, as the calls that are coming in for it are simply remarkable,
and the sooner it gets out of my mind the better.
You will notice that the publications with reference to the little
log cabin etc., that have come out recently are unusually good, and
just as soon as I can get the publication matter from Doubleday Doran
Company, I believe the book will receive a storm of applause.
I want you to know also that I have never in all my experience
had a Bulletin to receive the real ovation like the Bulletin on "Weeds".
With every good wish, I am
Most sincerely and gratefully yours,
George W. Carver 

My esteemed friends, Mr. and Mrs. Woodburn:
This is to thank you for your most interesting letter ....
I note that most of the book is now in, and that you hope to
be able to announce its issue early in 1943, that is, you hope to go
to press before Christmas.
I am very certain that the book will be one of the outstanding
biographies that has come out recently. I believe that every soldier
will want a copy.
My strength comes and goes at times. I am able to get to my
office occasionally. At other times I am absolutely unable to get there
at all.
With every good wish, I am
Sincerely yours,
G. W. Carver 

My dear Mrs. Holt:
Thank you very much for your interesting letter and the material
which you returned. . . .
I wish so much that the book could be finished. I think that 
it should be closed up. I had a letter from Mr. Woodburn stating
that it would be sometime in December before the book could be
announced. I was hoping so much that this book could be finished
before it had to close with something sordid. . . .
With reference to the paintings, I thought that I made it clear
sometime ago that I myself had absolutely nothing to do with the
paintings or anything pertaining to the gift. They are the property of
the Foundation governed by a Board of Trustees of which President
Patterson is Chairman of the Board . . . . They have taken the
firm stand that nothing must be removed from the galleries, and
nothing can be removed without the action of the Trustees. I, who
established the Foundation, would naturally not have anything to do
with it except by courtesy, and that is the reason I am on the Board
of Trustees, and will be as long as I live. I go to the meetings when
I can; otherwise I do not, so that there is absolutely no chance of
getting the pictures.
Now as to the last paragraph, Mr. Ford will not be in Detroit
at the time you designate, I am sure, as he comes South early in the
spring to his Richmond Hill estate. He hasn't designated to me as
yet just when this trip will be made, but he stops to see me either
going or coming as we have many matters to take up in connection
with our work, so he stops over for about two hours. All the time,
of course, except a few moments is closeted with myself.
Now may I suggest that you get in touch with Mr. Frank Campsall
and make your plans to visit Dearborn and the Edison Institute. Mr.
Campsall will naturally direct you as far as they think wise, and
naturally you will be directed to the Engineering Laboratories with
Professor R. A. Smith in charge. Mr. Ford is naturally a very difficult
person to see, and then unusually reticent. . . .
Mr. Curtis is away, and has been for nearly a week, so I am
here struggling along as best I can, so may I urge again to please
finish the book as I would like to have it come out while I am still
able to see it, and not have it, as I stated before, to end sordidly
which must be done pretty soon.
With every good wish, and with regrets to write a blue letter
like this, yet it seems quite necessary for your sake as you have what
no other person in the world has, as I told Mr. Curtis last week
that you have material that he himself has not, and it would take a
careful writer many months such as you have spent in getting this
material. Please let us close it out as rapidly as possible.
Sincerely yours, 
G. W. Carver 

My beloved friend, Miss Dare:
I have read your letter as usual with much interest and satisfaction. I presume you have a copy of Dr. Glenn Clarks little booklet
on "The Man Who Talks With the Flowers", it is just a simple
account of his two visits here and he tells it in his own imitable way.
The book is being sold by the thousands, it is perfectly remarkable
the people who are sending for it. I understand that book stores are
ordering it in large quantities so that they may have a supply on
hand at all times. I have a letter to that effect from the publishers
and always everyday letters come to me with reference to it.
It seems to me like anything that I would write would fall so
short of the beautiful way that you put things that it would detract
from it rather than add anything and then to me it is so refreshing
to get just what people of real worth say. Not to please me however,
but the real estimate of worth. Please think this over and if you
agree, we will let it go just that way.
I believe that your writings would have so much more weight
and if you know how impossible it is for me to write anything about
myself because the more I attempt to write about myself, the worse
it gets and after while I get so disgusted with it that I just throw it
away.
I am most gratefully and
Sincerely yours,
George W. Carver 

My beloved friend, Miss Crisp:
Thank you so much for your very interesting letter which has
just reached me.
I am glad to know that you are going to proceed along the
lines with reference to your book as you have applied it as that is
the only way to get the best results. I did not mean to convey the
idea at all that you should change the book, but I did feel and do
yet, that you could write a small booklet that would be quite as
catchy and popular as Dr. Clark's as you two have such a unique
way in expressing yourself. That is, I have not had anyone express
themselves just as you do, and naturally, a small booklet would not
be in any since a replica of the larger one. I do appreciate, however,
the comments made by your friend. He brings up several angles
that I have not thought of myself as I am not an authority on book
writing or salesmanship either ....
With every good wish and highest personal regards, I am so
Sincerely yours,
George W. Carver 

My esteemed friend, Miss Crisp:
This is just to extend you greetings, and thank you for your
letter ....
I am glad you take the attitude towards your book that you do,
as it will be one entirely different from the one Mrs. Holt is writing.
She is here yet andwiII probably be here for some weeks longer.
The Doubleday Doran people seem to not care at all with reference
to how much money they are spending on this book. It must be
costing them thousands of dollars because to send her around over
the country and keep her here for months at a time as she has
been more than two years writing this book. Your's will be entirely
different and will sell at a much smaller price, which to my mind
will meet the pocketbooks of the layman. I fear as elaborately as
the Doubleday Doran people are illustrating their's the price will be
beyond the poorer people. Nevertheless, if that is what they want,
they are the publishers and putting their money into it so they know
much more in five minutes than I would in five years because I am
not a publisher, and they are ... 
Very sincerely yours,
G. W. Carver

My beloved friend, Mr. Zeller:-
Before me is a copy of "The Winterset Madisonian", containing
your wonderful article. I say wonderful advisedly.
It is an article that never looses its charm, it is rich in thought,
correct in what it portrays, and is truly a fascinating story, when
one starts to read, they are loth to put it down until finished. I do
not deserve all the credit you have given me. . . .
May God continue to bless and keep you always.
Admiringly yours,
G. W. Carver 

My beloved friend, Dr. Ross:
This is just to extend you greetings, and to say that I had the
pleasure of seeing Mrs. A. B. Griggs for just a few minutes. She came
unannounced, and there are some days when I cannot see anybody 
at all according to the doctor's orders.
For about three weeks I have had an attack of "flu" that robbed
me of my strength almost completely and took my appetite, and
naturally I got so weak I could hardly stand up. I am just now
beginning to get my physical strength back again, but you know how
our people do very largely. They wait until it is too late, and then
make a grand rush to see you, take your picture, news writers want
your story, artists want you to pose, and all manner of things I can't
possibly do.
In addition to that I have a person who is writing a book and
she is here and has been several times, and I am obliged to see her
daily if I have the strength to do it. This book will be issued by
the Doubleday Doran Company and will doubtless be a monumental
volume as she is considered one of the best writers in the entire
country ....
With much love, I am
So sincerely yours,
G. W. Carver 

My very dear friend, Mr. Hardwick:
Your fine letter reached me this evening and I cannot forego
the pleasure of writing to you right away.
I am glad you enjoyed your visit here ....
My friend, God has indeed been good to me and is yet opening
up wonders and allowing me to peep in as it were. I do love the
things God has created, both animate and inanimate. As he speaks
aloud through both, God willing, at Blue Ridge we will let Him talk
to some of us.
You do me too much credit. I am not so good. I am just trying,
through Christ, to be a better man each day. Your spirit helps me
so much. It is what my very soul has thirsted for all these years, a
spirit that God likewise was developing to perform a great service
to humanity, such as he is developing in you ....
My "horoscope" tells me that God is yet going to do some
thing for you that will astonish you. Just to think you have been 
here. We are to see each other in June, and this is not all. He has
something else in mind for us. My prayers and blessings are always
for you.
Sincerely yours,
Geo. W. Carver 

It is impossible for me to tell you how astonished I was yesterday to
get a copy of the November issue of Junior Red Cross Journal bearing
the illuminating article on "The Sage of Tuskegee." As I read it a
number of times I became so interested that I forgot that it was about
myself. In fact, the story is so beautifully and interestingly written that
it is hard for me to believe that it is about me. I lose that part of it. 

My esteemed friend and home-folks, Mrs. Goodwin:-
What a wonderful holiday greeting this is I consider the finest
of all.
Your letter causes tears to Come to my eyes as I recall childhood's
happy days. 
As a boy, Thomas Carver, (I called him, your Father) was my
ideal young man, I loved him as I did my own brother, and indeed
he was a very dear handsome young fellow.
How I would love to see him, I am sure neither would know
the other, as both have changed so much in all of these years.
As I remember it you was just a little girl when I left. It is
a little hazy in my mind as to how you looked, if you were even
born.
I passed through Neosho last Oct. a year ago enroute to Tulsa
Okla. Where I had the peanut exhibit displayed at the State Fair.
The train stopped for quite a little while at Neosho, but it was
dark and I could recognize nothing.
The New Junior High School which is being erected for colored
children is named for me and the Board of Education is very anxious
that I come out and dedicate it.
It will be sometime this coming Feb. I am not sure if I can
make the trip as I am not very strong now.
I certainly feel just as you do about kinship.
Your letter over comes me with Joy, I cannot write any more
now, this letter must reach you before the New Year comes in.
Please let me hear from you further. The address is correct.
So sincerely yours,
With love to all my dear home folks.
Geo. W. Carver 

My dear Mrs. Goodwin:-
It is impossible for you to know how your letter made me feel,
if you had only been a hundred mile or so away I would have started
immediately to see you.
I have sat and looked long and hard at your Father's picture.
While he has changed quite as much as I have, I can still discern
that handsome kindly face, which made him to me ideal.
Of course you are happy to do the things for him, how I love
this picture, one of my dearest boyhood playmates.
If I go to Oklahoma, the way I went before I will pass through
Neosho, and it may be that I can arrange to stop over a day, or
between trains at least. And see you dear Father and the rest. I
am too beginning to feel the weight of years and cannot do much
traveling now.
How I would love to get with your Father and talk over old
times at home, indeed you really are my home folks.
Thank you for the clipping referring to the death of dear Mr.
Carver, (Uncle Mose) I treasure it very much.
How delightful to have you speak of your Father in that way.
I beleive every word of it, his face shows it.
Yes I can remember you as a little girl, used to hold you on my
lap. I certainly would appreciate any pictures of the old homeplace.
I am sure it has changed very much.
I thank the good people for their words of approval, why should
I not be able to do pretty well, I certainly had good home training
by my "home folks".
My heart indeed goes out to my dear "Home Folks", Love and
the best of wishes to your good neighbors.
I am so sincerely yours,
C. W. Carver

My dear Mr. Borthwick:-
How your letter astonishes me. Yes I am the same Ceo. W.
Carver.
I do indeed remember you so pleasantly, when you came to
the Steely home.
My, how I would love to see you and those other dear boys
as well as some of myoid haunts.
Clad you liked the story in the American, cut it down 75% and
you will get at just about what is right.
The enclosures may interest you. 
So sincerely yours,
G. W. Carver 

My esteemed friend Mr. Lennen:
This is to acknowledge receipt of your fine letter which came
yesterday.
I want you to know also that I received the extra papers, for
which I am very grateful. Of course everyone who sees the paper
wants it, but I cannot let them have mine, as I have certain strategic
points into which these papers will fit. I wish to thank you for the
fine article, not only for the historical data, but for the personal
interest you take.
I am more and more enthused over the fact that you and Mr.
Borthwick must come down, and see some of the things about which
you have been writing, and some of the things the public will not
believe because they cannot conceive of such things, but they are
here. It also emphasizes the type of mind that you and Mr. Borthwick
had, that you were able to look into the future of a struggling young
Negro boy and discern that there was something in him worthy of
a chance in life like other folks. If you could only take a day or two
off and study the Museum alone, I am sure it would open your eyes
even wider.
The narrative you gave the young man is essentially correct.
I hope you will talk it over with Mr. Borthwick and see if there
is not some way by which you can both get down here.
Most sincerely yours,
George W. Carver 

My dear Editor Barnd:
I presume that I am endebted to you for a copy of June the
8th issue of the News giving such an illuminating account of the
Old Settlers Reunion. As I looked over the program, I grew very
much enthused. I wish so much that I could have been there to
have shared in it. I saw several names that I remember, and am
certain had I been there I would have seen quite a number of my
old friends.
Another interesting and pleasant thing to note is the improvement
in the paper. I am amazed at the size of it, appearance, and the
splendid news items written in a way that if one starts to read an
article he is loathe to put it down until finishing it.
There is only one article that I see that could be improved,
and that is the one entitled "George Washington Carver", which is
overestimated seventy-five per cent.
I want to say, however, to the good people of Ness City that
lowe much to them for what little I have been able to accomplish,
as I do not recall a single instance in which I was not given ·an
opportunity to develop the best that was within me.
In looking over the bird's eye view of Ness City, it seems that
I can remember some of the houses. Should I ever be priviledged
to come that way, expect me to stop.
Again thanking you for the paper, I am
Yours very sincerely,
G. W. Carver 

Well Mr. and Mrs. Milholland here it is nearly 11 oclock sunday
evening of the next week and your letter not finished, I hope to be
able to finish it this time I have been trying to write ever since I
received you letter as I was so very glad to hear from you I have
been quite sic since you wrote and had to be excused from school
one afternoon but I am better now I get a scolding nearly every day
about working so hard by my teacher we will have vacation in a
week for one week I want to go up to Des. Moins during that time.
I have been waiting to paint or rather get an idea of the transparent
work in flowers before sending you the copy I am painting flowers
now I have nearly finished one very large marine and am painting
on an origion design of the cactus and yucca like my teachers only
very much larger the canvass is 22 x 48 inches The people are very
very kind to me here and the students are wonderfully good they
took into their heads that I was working too hard and had not home
comforts eneough and they clubbed together and bought me three
real nice chairs and a very nice table they left them for me while
I was at school. I have the name unjustly of haveing one of the
broadest minds in school. My teacher told me the other day that she
is sorry she did not find me out sooner, so she could have planned
differently for me Well this subject is getting very monotonous to
me and was before I begun it, but I thought you would like and
be interested in knowing what they thought of me; please dont let
anyone see this letter but the home folks .... Nearly 12 please
excuse me and write sooner than you did before My best respects
to all I remain your humble servant of God I am learning to trust
and realise the blessed results from trusting in Him every day I am
glad to hear of your advancement spiritualy and financially, I regard
them also as especial blessings from God
Sincerely yours
Geo. W. Carver.

Mr. & Mrs. Milholland, dear friends:-
Since you wrote, me I have been to Des Moines and back again
It was very muddy, but I had a nice time, I was to see your sister
Mrs. Maley and took dinner with her . . . . I am taking better care
of myself than I have, I realize that God has a great work for me
to do and consequently I must be very careful of my health. You
will doubtless be surprised to learn that I am taking both vocal and
instrumental music (piano) this term. I don't have to pay any direct
money for any music, but pay it in paintings they heard me sing
several times and then they gave me no rest until I took it or rather
consented to. They are very kind and take especial pains with me.
I can now sing up to high D and 8 octaves below I have only had
one lesson. He told some of the students that he thought he could
develop some wonderful things out of my voice or something to that
effect ....
I am glad the out look for the upbuilding of the kingdom of
Christ is so good. We are having a great revival here. 40 seeking
last night and 25 rose for prayers at the close of the service. I did
not go tonight. My best regards to all and to your nephew also as
I suppose he is there now Shall be glad to hear from you soon.
Geo. W. Carver

Mr. & Mrs. Milholland, dear friends:-
I will try to pen you a few lines in answer to your very kind
epistle of a recent date .... I as yet do not like it as well here as
I do at S. because the helpfull means for a Christian growth is not
so good; but the Lord helping me I will do the best I can. . . . I
am glad to hear that the work for Christ is progressing. Oh how I
wish the people would awake up from their lethargy and come out
soul and body for Christ. I am so anxious to get out and be doing
something. I can hardly wait for the time to come. The more my
ideas develop, the more beautifull and grand seems the plan I have
laid out to pursue, or rather the the one God has destined for me.
lt is really all I see in a successful life. And let us hope that in the
mysterious ways of the Lord, he will bring about these things we all
so much hope for. I wish it was so that we could assist each other
in the work as there is such a sameness in it, and I seen by one of
the late southern papers that one of their strongest men advocates a
broader system of education, and lays down a plan very much like
the one I have but not as broad. And the more I study and pray over
it, the more I am convinced it is the right coarse to pursue . . . .
Let us pray that the Lord will completely guide us in all things, and
that we may gladly be led by him. . . . My hope is still keeping
without becoming stale either.
George

My dear friends:-
I was indeed more than pleased to hear from you. Had you not
written you would have received a letter from me soon as I intended
writing ....
I am glad to know that you are all well and that the Lord is
blessing you so unsparingly. Beg pardon for finishing with a pencil
but my pen has run dry and I have no ink with which to fill it. The
Lord is wonderfully blessing me and has for these many years. I
cannot begin to tell you all I presume you know I had some paintings
at the Cedar Rapids Art exhibit, was there myself and had some
work selected and sent to The World's Fair, was also sent to Lake
Geneva twice to the Y.M.CA. Summer School as a representative
from our college.
And the many good things the Lord has entrusted to my care
are too numerous to mention here. The last but not least I have been
elected Assistant Station bottanist, I intend to take a post graduate
course here, which will take two years. One year of residence work
and one of nonresidence work. I hope to do my non-residence work
next year and in the meantime take a course at the Chicago, academy 
of arts and Moody institute. I am saving all the pennies I can for
the purpose and am praying a great deal. I believe more and more
in prayer all the time.
I thank you very much for your kind invitation to visit you
nothing would give me greater pleasure and I will do so if I can
but I will have to cancel some alter cantemplated visits. There are
so many that are so determined that I shall make them a visit this
winter. But I think I will get to see you as I have much to tell you
and ask your advice about.
I have been to A reception nearly every night last week and
the cards are out for part of this week. One given by the Pres. of
the College and several down town that are not connected with the
institution I dont pretend to go to all of them ....
Enclosed please find catalogue and classification of our Miss.
library which has been secured and paid for this year, our band 2
yrs. ago was organized as a reading circle with 3 members including
myself. We now have a num. of about 29. with 2 volunteers Cod
bless you
Geo. W. Carver 

My dear freinds, Mr. and Mrs. Milholland,
Your esteemed favor of July 23rd reached me a few days ago
and I was indeed glad to hear from you. . . .
I think of you often and shall never forget what you were to
my life, how much real help and inspiration you gave me. You, of
course will never know how much you done for a poor colored boy
who was drifting here and there as a ship without a rudder. You
helped to start me aright and what the Lord has in his kindness and
wisdom permitted me to accomplish is due in a very great measure
to your real jenuine Christian spirits, how I wish the world was full
of such people, what a different world it would be.
Should I ever come so near you again rest assured I am coming
to see you, and I plan to come to Iowa during some of my vacations. 
Must close as I have about 20 letters to answer aside from my
other duties.
May God continue to bless and keep you.
Love to all.
Yours very greatfully
Geo. W. Carver

My dear freinds:-
How I enjoyed your delightful greeting. You all are so often in
my mind, as the years come and go.
I am glad to know that all are well, and am especially thankful
that the good Lord has spared me to write to you.
This summer I came near loosing my life, and I am yet unable
to see how I could pass through such an ordeal and yet live. A large
auto truck turned turtle with several of us in it, one man was badly
mashed up so much so that he is yet after 7 months unable to walk,
I was pinned down under the truck, badly bruised and cut up but
no bones broken.
Every time I pick up a paper I think of what Mr. Sherman said
war was, words fail to describe the horror and suffering.
It is making it very hard here for us, not much money is coming
in and how we will get along God only knows.
I have just learned that 25 girls are nearly barefooted and have
not sufficient closes to keep them decent or warm.
Many of the boys are almost as bad, so we are going to do
what we can for them.
I do hope the entire holiday season will bring to you many Joys
and permit you to share it with the less fortionate.
Sincerely your friend,
Geo. W. Carver 

My dear Prof Pammel
Your esteemed favor of May 29th at hand and contents duely
noted. I hope you will pardon me for giving you so much trouble
concerning my paper for the Acad. of Science.
I fear I could not get up a paper worthy of presentation on puff
balls this year as I have only a very limited number in my collection
and have given them but little thought since I came, again here they
do not appear until quite late in the fall, making it quite late to collect
and identify.
I am making a specialty of the circos form have a set nearly ready
to send you, nearly all or quite all are named by good authorities
and will add more to the list. I should like [illegible] & Macon Co.
lf you will help me with it, I have never been anywhere or anyplace
whence Cir. were so abundant. I appreciate your effort to help me,
but this is not new, or unusual to me, as during the 6 years I was
privileged to be under your tutor ship and at times when I know it
must have cost you much to do it. It does me a great deal of good
as I read from time to time clippings of your success.
Yours most truly
Geo. W. Carver 

My dear Dr. Pammel:-
I am just recovering from the extreme pleasure of having you
visit me, the fulfillment of a long cherished hope.
I had talked so much about you that everyone was eager to
see you, and said without hesitancy that I ought to know something
coming up under such a scholar as yourself.
My only regret was that you could not stay longer and that
school was not in session.
Everyone wanted to hear you speak. I really wanted you to see
the suit of clothes, hat, gloves, underwear, you helped fool me down
town and bought for me, preparatory to going to Cedar Rapids to 
the Art exhibit with some of my pictures.
All of the things mentioned are nearly as good as new, the
gloves show the most wear.
Of course my mycroscope is just as good as new.
I was so glad to see that God had dealt so kindly with you,
by giving you increased bodily vigor, great mental attainments etc.
When you were going out of your way to help a poor insignificant
black boy, you were giving m~ny "cups of cold water" in His name.
The memory of yourself, Mrs. Pammel and the children are
more dear to me than my words can express.
They have served as lamps unto my feet and lights along my
pathway .... Sincerly and greatfully yours,
G. W. Carver

My dear Dr. Pammel:
In response to your queries of recent date, I beg to reply as
follows:
1st. Born at Diamond Grove, Mo., just as freedom was declared,
in a little one roomed log shanty on my master, Moses Carver's farm.
2nd. My education was picked up here and there. Mr. and
Mrs. Carver taught me to read, spell and write just a little. I went
to Neosho, Mo., public school for about nine months, then to Fort
Scott town school, for about the same length of time. From there, I
went to Olathe, Kans., where I attended the town public school for
about two years.
Leaving here, I went to Minneapolis, Kansas, where I nearly
finished my high school work. From here, I went to Indianola, Iowa,
to Simpson College, where I took the College work and specialized
in art and some music.
From here I went to Ames, Iowa to take a course in Agriculture,
persuaded to do so by my art teacher, Miss Etta M. Budd, to whom
I am greatly indebted for whatever measure of success that has come
to me.
Miss Budd helped me in whatever way she could; often going
far out of her way to encourage and see that I had such things -as 
I needed.
During my six years in College, her interest in me never waned.
3rd. I do not now recall the exact date.
4th. I did odd jobs of all kinds for a number of the professors,
such as cutting wood; making gardens; working in the fields; helping
clean house; taking care of the green house and the chemical, botanical
and bacteriological laboratories.
5th. Came to Tuskegee Institute, and took charge of the
Agricultural Department here; kept it about fifteen years, then was
given charge of the Agricultural Research work. I have kept this work
in connection with the Experiment Station ever since.
6th. I have no words to adequately express my impressions of
dear old I.s.c. All I am and all I hope to be, I owe in a very large
measure to this blessed institution.
7th. "Beardshear", was one of the biggest and best hearted men
I have ever known and it was so pleasant and uplifting to come in
contact with him.
"Wilson", the name of Han. James Wilson is sacred to me. He
was one of the finest teachers that it has ever been my privilege to
listen to. He taught a Sunday School class in which every student
would have enrolled, if they had been allowed.
The class grew so large that he conceived a very unique plan to
divide it, so he graduated some twenty or twenty-five of us who had
been with him the longest and to some he gave classes. I happened
to be one of the ones graduated. We all left him sad and reluctantly.
We gave him to understand, in no uncertain terms, that we did not
like it at all and out of our love for him, we went, but in less than
two months we were all back again.
Our displeasure grieved him very much and he said to me,
many times that he would never try to divide his class again, no
matter how large it got.
Being a colored boy, and the crowded condition of the school,
made it rather embarrassing for some, and it made the question of
a room rather puzzling. Prof. Wilson said, as soon as he heard it.,
"Send him to me, I have a room," and he gave me his office and
was very happy in doing so.
"Budd" was the father of Miss Etta M. Budd, heretofore mentioned, and my professor of Horticulture and a man much on the
order of Prof. Wilson; kind, considerate, loving and loveable; a great
teacher, and he made of his students his personal friends.
Everybody loved Prof. Budd. 
Stanton, "Stanty", as he was affectionately called, did all within
his power to enthuse, and inspire me in the science of plane geometry;
but, having such poor material to work with, his efforts were not
crowned with very brilliant success, which of course was not his
fault.
Prof. Stanton was the finest teacher of Mathematics I have ever
seen. He was universially loved by everyone who had the privilege
of knowing him.
Osborn. Prof. Osborn, as we knew him, was an expert teacher
of entomology, even in temperament, always ready to help a pupil
who was really seeking information. Every one liked to go to his
class and witness the ease and perfection with which he could draw
insects, apparantly with one hand as good as the other. He was also
credited with the very rare accomplishment of being able to draw
equally as well with both hands at the same time.
I never knew him to get thoroughly out of patience but once,
and that was with a member of the Sophomore class, with whom he
had labored long and hard to enthuse with the beauty and usefulness
of his subject. The question was to describe the nervous system of
a beetle. The young fellow proceeded thus:
"The nervous system of a beattIe begins with a number of
ganglion on either side of the thorax and extends entirely down on
either side of the backbone." You will agree with me, I am sure,
that his disgust was perfectly justifiable. Many are the favors and
kindinesses, I received at the hands of this good man.
Miss Roberts was a teacher of rare ability. Her chief delight
seemed to be that of helping the backward student. And many, many
are the men and women today who rise up and call her blessed,
for the help she gave them in more ways than one. I take especial
delight in registering as one of that number.
Prof. S. W. Byer was also one of my teachers whom I loved
very dearly. The thing that possibly impressed me most was, his
youthfulness, superior ability as a teacher in the broadest sense of
the term. I longed to be, and wondered if I could ever be like him.
Prof. Marston was another very remarkable man, to whom lowe
much of my success; He was stern, exacting and with all this, the best
of all was, that whatever mark he gave you, you may rest assured
that you earned it. The success of the students in his particular line
are the highest testimonials as to his ability as a teacher.
Prof. Curtis. Every young man wanted to be like Prof. Curtis
when they grew up, if they could; but the standard of excellence
was set so high, it seemed well nigh impossible. Prof. Curtis will
never know in this world how much he inspired and helped me as
a student; for which I am more thankful than any words of mine
can express.
Prof. D. A. Kent. Unfortunately for me, I only had Prof. Kent
as a teacher for a short time. I would like to see the student with
any brains who did not love Prof. Kent, indeed he was not only a
good teacher but fatherly and made you feel so perfectly at home
in his presence.
Prof. H. Knapp, as we delighted to call him was a man of
rare accomplishments and worth to every student. His advise was so
wholesome, sound and I never in my entire six years at the College
knew him to turn a student or anybody else away, without giving
them good wholesome and inspiring advice when they needed it. I
am now reaping rewards from advice he gave me when I first came
to the Institution.
Prof. H. Wallace is now Hon. Secretary of Agriculture,
Washington, D. C. The heights to which he has risen testifies more
strongly than any words of mine can. No one missed Prof. Wallace's
class, if they could help it. He was a born teacher; a man too big
in heart, mind and soul to be little in any particular. He, like all of
my teachers will never know how much he enthused and inspired
me, as a student.
Dr. Stalker. While I did not come directly under Dr. Stalker, as
a pupil, I would put myself in his way every chance I got. I never
found him to busy or too tired to talk with and advise me. He was a
man of rare attainments; artistic in temperament; a great student of
nature, and a man whose very presence was inspiring and uplifting.
Prof. Bennett gave me my start in Chemistry for which I am
very thankful. I wish he knew how much he helped a poor struggling
colored boy. I am sure the great and good God will reward him
accordingly.
Miss Doolittle. To Miss Margarette Doolittle, one of the best
teachers I have ever met, lowe a lasting debt of gratitude. No student
missed Miss Doolittle's class unless compelled to do so.
Miss Stacey. To Miss Stacey, lowe not only my knowledge of
music; but many other useful things to round out my life, which
shall always be a cherished and graceful legacy to me.
Prof. Patrick was my teacher of Agricultural Chemistry. His
memory is loved and revered by me. He seemed to take special
delight in giving me information, both in and out of the class room.
Geo. W. Carver

My dear Dr. Pammell:-
For some months you have been on my mind more than ever.
My life has been crowded unusually full for some months, being
out on lecture tours almost continuously since the 6th of Dec.
The papers have been very liberal and even profuse in their
"write ups." The Atlanta papers, both the Constitution and the Journal
carried elaborate "write ups" and my picture, I am inclosing one from
the magazine section of the Journal.
The St. Louis Globe Democrat carried a fine article and a much
finer editorial comment.
May issue of Popular Science Monthly has a picture and an
interesting write up.
There is some talk (in the air only), of having one of our large
colleges confer a Dr.'s degree upon me.
I do not covet this much from any "Institution" except Ames
(I.s.C).
You giving me the start you did while there and continuing on
through all the years I have been out, I have just been wondering if
my institution would not like to honor me and my race in this way.
Of course if I am not worthy of it I do not want them to do
it.
Now as far as I individually am concerned I am not so much
interested but it would help and encourage my race greatly.
Confidentially Dr. Pammel, what do you think of it.
Please tell me frankly, I have always taken your advice, and
always intend to. . . . Sincerely yours,
Geo. W. Carver

My dear Dr. Pammel:-
Thank you so much for your letter and inclosures. This is just 
like you for the world. I did not mean that you should do this. I
simply wanted the information that I might qualify if I could.
You may be surprised to know that I wore the suit you fooled
me into the store and bought for me while in school. I wore it to
a banquet, suit, hat and gloves, the people thought it new. Kindest
regards to Mrs. Pammel.
Sincerely yours,
Geo. W. Carver 
